September 16, 2008                                                                     1 of 108



                     Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on
                                     September 16, 2008

       A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, September 16,
2008, at 8:30 a.m. Those present were the following:

       Mr. Bernanke, Chairman
       Ms. Duke
       Mr. Fisher
       Mr. Kohn
       Mr. Kroszner
       Ms. Pianalto
       Mr. Plosser
       Mr. Stern
       Mr. Warsh

       Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lockhart, and Ms. Yellen, Alternate
       Members of the Federal Open Market Committee

       Messrs. Bullard, Hoenig, and Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St.
       Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively

       Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist
       Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary
       Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
       Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
       Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel
       Mr. Sheets, Economist
       Mr. Stockton, Economist

       Messrs. Connors, English, Kamin, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Slifman, Tracy, and Wilcox,
       Associate Economists

       Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Account

       Mr. Cole, Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors

       Mr. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors

       Mr. Parkinson, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors

       Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors

       Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of Staff Director for Management, Board
       of Governors
September 16, 2008                                                                      2 of 108




      Mr. Gagnon, Visiting Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
      Governors

      Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, Associate Directors, Division of Research and
      Statistics, Board of Governors

      Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors

      Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors

      Mr. Luecke, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors

      Mr. Carlson, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors

      Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
      Governors

      Mr. Moore, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco

      Mr. Judd, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco

      Mr. Altig, Ms. Baum, Messrs. Rasche, Schweitzer, Sellon, and Tootell, Senior Vice
      Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, St. Louis, Cleveland, Kansas
      City, and Boston, respectively

      Mr. Krane, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago

      Mr. Chatterjee, Senior Economic Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia

      Mr. Wolman, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
September 16, 2008                                                                             3 of 108



                    Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting on
                                         September 16, 2008

           CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning, everybody. Sorry for the late beginning.

The markets are continuing to experience very significant stresses this morning, and there are

increasing concerns about the insurance company AIG. That is the reason that Vice Chairman

Geithner is not attending, and Chris Cumming will sit in his place.

           I want to turn in a minute to Bill Dudley for his usual report, and he will be able to give

you more information about the situation. There is another action item I would like to add, given

what is happening, which is that there are very significant problems with dollar funding in other

jurisdictions--in Europe and elsewhere. After Bill makes his presentation and we have our

discussion, I would like to put on the table a request for authorization for swap lines. I prefer not

to put a limit on it, so I know I've got my own bazooka here. [Laughter] There is a Foreign

Currency Subcommittee that consists of myself, the Vice Chairman of the FOMC, and the Vice

Chairman of the Board. Again, after Bill's discussion, I would like to discuss the possibility of

giving us a temporary authority to use swap lines as needed.

           Before I turn to Bill, let me say one other thing. Obviously, we started late. We have a

lot to talk about. I would like--just for today, if you would indulge me--to condense our

discussion to one round. In your discussion, please include your tentative views on the policy

decision. Obviously, that is not ideal because you will not have heard everyone else's views, but

we will have an opportunity afterward for people to amend, revise, and give additional thoughts.

But in the interest of time, I think it would be more efficient at this time just to do it that way.

Without further ado, let me turn to Bill and ask for a report.

           MR. DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am not going to go through this in
       great detail. You can look at these charts at your leisure. 1 I am going to focus on
1
    The materials to which Mr. Dudley refers are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).
September 16, 2008                                                                           4 of 108



   what is going on right now, how we have responded to it, and what I think the issues
   are. Just to give you a snapshot of what has happened since Sunday evening, stocks
   are down worldwide--4 percent plus everywhere. Yesterday, the U.S. stock market
   was down about 4½ percent, and S&P futures indicate a lower opening today. As you
   might expect, there has been a big flight to quality, especially into the Treasury bill
   market. Ten-year Treasury note yields fell about 30 basis points yesterday, and there
   has been a big rally throughout the Treasury curve. The big thing, where there has
   probably been the most severe stress in the market, is in dollar liquidity for foreign
   banks. As you remember, foreign banks, especially in Europe, have a structural
   dollar funding shortfall, and they look to execute foreign exchange swaps or borrow
   in the dollar LIBOR market to fund that. There was significant upward pressure in
   that market--overnight LIBOR rates today were 6.44 percent--and that pressure in
   Europe is leaking over into our market. Yesterday the federal funds rate opened at
   3 to 3½ percent. Despite our doing a $20 billion repo at our normal 9:30 a.m. time,
   the upward pressure on the funds rate yesterday continued. It rose to as high as
   6 percent in the late morning, and that is why we came in with a second operation of
   $50 billion around noon yesterday.

        To try to have more effect on this issue, this morning we came in much earlier
   than we normally do--around 8:00 a.m. We did a $50 billion overnight repo. The
   funds rate at the time was trading at 3¼ percent. I think this means that we are
   obviously adding way too many reserves for the current maintenance period; but the
   good news is that, when this maintenance period is over a week from tomorrow, we
   get a fresh start. So at the current time I think we will see essentially a lot of firmness
   in the funds rate in the morning and then the funds rate trading down to zero late in
   the day. Where the funds rate averages relative to the target is going to be somewhat
   difficult to say. Yesterday, despite the collapse in the funds rate to essentially zero at
   the end of the day, the funds rate was quite firm relative to the target. I don't
   remember the numbers, but it was in the 2½ percent range. We are going to try to hit
   the target on average, but it is going to be very difficult. In the current circumstances,
   it probably is more sensible--at least my advice would be--to err on the side of
   providing enough liquidity to the market rather than trying to be cute and worrying
   just about the target federal funds rate.

       Now, the Lehman filing has also intensified the pressure on Morgan Stanley and
   Goldman Sachs in a number of respects. The Lehman failure means that investors
   now view the debt of Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs as having much more risk
   than it did on Sunday. This means that these firms need bigger liquidity buffers than
   they had before, and it does have implications for long-term profitability. As a
   consequence, their share prices fell very sharply yesterday. Morgan Stanley was
   down about $5 a share, to $32, and Goldman Sachs's stock was off 18 points, to
   $135. Morgan Stanley experienced a modest, but not insignificant, pulling back of
   their counterparties and ate into their liquidity buffer by a measurable degree. The
   Lehman problems also were evident in some other areas. This is very incomplete, but
   the ones that came to my attention were money market funds--especially, the
   Reserve Fund that had large withdrawals, and they encountered a significant liquidity
September 16, 2008                                                                               5 of 108



   problem. I am actually not sure how that was resolved, but I think that State Street
   was in the situation of having to cover a very large shortfall of the Reserve Fund last
   night. The risk here, of course, is that, if AIG were to fail, money funds have even a
   broader exposure to them than to Lehman, and so breaking the buck on the money
   market funds is a real risk. The capital resources of the entities that are associated
   with the money market funds often are quite modest, so their ability to top up the
   money funds and keep them whole is quite limited. Thus the money market funds are
   definitely one important issue in how this contagion could be broader.

       The second issue is the people who are dealing with Lehman and who have
   positions with Lehman as their counterparty and how they wind up those positions.
   As you know, the parent filed for bankruptcy, but the U.S. broker-dealer is still in
   operation. But being in operation doesn't mean that they are necessarily conducting
   business in a normal way. One issue that has received a lot of attention is from some
   of the asset managers on their mortgage TBA positions with Lehman. Apparently,
   the sell side can net these up pretty easily through the FICC (Fixed Income Clearing
   Corporation), but the asset managers have positions with Lehman to either take on
   mortgage-backed securities or to sell mortgage-backed securities on a forward basis,
   and they are not really sure what those positions are going to be when we get to that
   date. Lehman was not executing those trades yesterday, and so these asset managers
   are in the very unfortunate position of not knowing what to do. Do they offset their
   Lehman position with a trade elsewhere or not? So that has been another very open-
   ended issue for the market. In terms of market function yesterday, it was manageable
   in the sense that markets did trade. But I think it is much too soon to think that we
   are going to make it through just based on yesterday's move because that move, even
   though it wasn't particularly severe in terms of, for example, the share price
   movement, did cause quite a bit of damage, and people are still pulling away.

        Of course, we also have the issue of AIG. The AIG problem is at least starting as
   a liquidity crisis. The problem with AIG is that the parent company doesn't have a
   lot of liquidity resources and doesn't have easy ability to funnel liquidity up from
   their subsidiaries because most of the subsidiaries are regulated entities. So AIG is
   running into two problems: One, they are unable to roll their commercial paper and,
   two, as their ratings are downgraded--they were downgraded by Moody's yesterday,
   I think from AA minus to A minus, but don't quote me on that--they have to post a
   lot more collateral against their derivatives exposures and also with respect to their
   GIC (guaranteed investment contract) business. So AIG is in a situation in which the
   parent is basically going to run out of money--today, tomorrow, Thursday, or very,
   very soon. Now we say it's a liquidity thing, but a lot of times when people look
   closer at the books they find out that the liquidity crisis may also be a solvency issue.
   I think it is still a little unclear whether AIG's problems are confined just to liquidity.
   It also may be an issue of how much this company is really worth.

      Finally, let me talk a bit about the facilities that we introduced over the weekend.
   Basically, we did two things. We broadened the Primary Dealer Credit Facility
   (PDCF) significantly in terms of collateral eligibility. Whereas, before, the PDCF
September 16, 2008                                                                         6 of 108



   took investment-grade securities only, we broadened it to include basically everything
   that is in the tri-party repo system. We felt that, by backstopping the tri-party repo
   system completely, we would reassure tri-party investors that they didn't face rollover
   risk, and so we would keep tri-party investors investing with the banks. That seems
   to be mostly what happened, at least yesterday. We did get quite a bit of PDCF
   borrowing yesterday evening, but it was predominantly Lehman. It was about $28
   billion of Lehman borrowing. I think the total borrowing was something on the order
   of $42 billion. That is telling you that most of the borrowing we had was associated
   with Lehman's not being able to roll over their tri-party repo positions with their
   investors. We don't really know the reasons for the other borrowing, but it probably
   was mostly to test the facility as opposed to actual need. So broadening the PDCF
   collateral eligibility does seem to be working, so far at least, in keeping tri-party
   investors in the game and continuing to provide funds to the other primary dealers.

        The second thing we did was to the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF). In
   terms of the collateral requirements, that had been AAA-rated RMBS, CMBS, and
   asset-backed securities. We broadened that collateral, so the terms are now the same
   as the old Primary Dealer Credit Facility. We think that there is quite a bit of
   collateral that the primary dealers have in those AA, A, and BBB classes of asset-
   backed securities, CMBS, and RMBS. So we think that is going to provide more
   support to the primary dealers in terms of funding their liquid collateral in this
   environment. We also increased the size. The original authorization was for $200
   billion. Our auction schedule had been $175 billion, and we put that $25 billion
   increase into schedule 2. Remember, there are schedules 1 and 2. Schedule 1 is
   Treasuries and agencies. Schedule 2 is Treasuries, agencies, and this other stuff. So
   the schedule 2 auctions are going to go up in size, and we frontloaded that increase
   because the TSLF has not been fully subscribed. We are actually going to be able to
   do two TSLF schedule 2 auctions this week of $35 billion, so we are going to get
   quite a bit of TSLF liquidity into the market this week, which we think will also be
   helpful.

       So that is where things stand. Otherwise, I think things in the market are doing
   what you would expect. There is a flight to quality. The Japanese yen and the Swiss
   franc are outperforming. The dollar is sort of in the middle, and the high-yielding
   currencies continue to be under pressure. But that is just what we have seen for the
   last year underlying these risk trades. I have a lot more material, so if you ask
   questions I can get into that. But I think I will just leave it there.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Questions for Bill? President Rosengren.

       MR. ROSENGREN. Just an amplification on the State Street situation. My

understanding is that no money actually went out. There was $20 billion in withdrawals that

came in late in the day. They had a $7½ billion credit line. State Street had enough collateral to
September 16, 2008                                                                          7 of 108



do $7½ billion. They were unwilling to do $20 billion. They asked us what our position was,

and we told them that they needed to make their own business decision in this case. I haven't

heard what has happened this morning. I assume that they are scrambling for funds. But I would

emphasize that a real concern is that there will be a run this week on money market funds

because they may have to freeze the funds. It is possible that they will break the buck, and this

will be at organizations that don't have sufficient capital to make people whole. So I think that is

a real concern.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser.

       MR. PLOSSER. Just a question on the PDCF, about the expansion of the collateral base.

You said there was $42 billion, $28 billion of it was Lehman. Do we know what kind of

collateral Lehman posted? Did they actually make use of the expanded options or not? What

was the nature of it, do you know?

       MR. DUDLEY. That was not actually even known until late yesterday evening. It takes

a while for us to get the reports from the clearing bank to be able to go through and tell you what

the collateral is. In terms of the Lehman collateral, they are not allowed to broaden the PDCF--

they are basically bringing us the stuff they had on Friday. It is also important to recognize that

for Lehman we are demanding a lot higher collateral requirements on the non-Treasury and non-

agency securities. Their collateral haircut for those is 20 percent. So the Fed is taking some

credit exposure there, but we put in place on Friday--and we are continuing that--a 20 percent

collateral haircut on the non-Treasury and non-agency stuff that is in the PDCF for that exposure

to Lehman. We think that's about roughly three times the market level that investors had been

charging previously, so I think that gives us a fair degree of protection.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
September 16, 2008                                                                          8 of 108



       MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The higher collateral requirement, is that

just Lehman?

       MR. DUDLEY. At this time, I believe that is right.

       MR. LACKER. Okay. I know there was a lot of concern going in yesterday about the

tri-party repo market, and I envisioned two scenarios and anything in between them. One is tri-

party lenders pulling away from particular names and moving their funds to other names.

Another, at the other extreme, would be tri-party repo lenders pulling away from the market as a

whole. If you look at the tri-party repo market from the point of view of the borrowers, that is a

frightening scenario. Then the lenders are going to do something with that money. I have been

curious about what they would do. My understanding is that cash balances, in essentially deposit

accounts, piled up at State Street and BONY yesterday and that they were able to do tri-party

repos with some institutions that had been pulled away from. Is that a valid observation? What

are the prospects for that providing some kind of resilience for the tri-party market?

       MR. DUDLEY. Well, I guess the first thing I would say is that you are absolutely right.

If investors pull away, they have to take their money somewhere. It doesn't disappear. I think

that the Primary Dealer Credit Facility has been shown to be pretty significant in providing

support to this market. If you look at what happened to Lehman, for example, even though

Lehman was under extreme pressure on Friday, the tri-party repo investors stayed with Lehman

on Friday night, which actually surprised me. I think the reason that they stayed is that they

knew they didn't really have a lot of rollover risk. As long as the broker-dealer didn't file for

bankruptcy over the weekend--and that was the risk they really were taking--the Federal

Reserve and the PDCF would be there as the tri-party repo investor of last resort. Lehman's

experience suggests to me that, if we can contain the broad parameters of this crisis so that it
September 16, 2008                                                                             9 of 108



doesn't spread much further, then we can keep the tri-party repo investors from bolting because

they don't really have a huge amount of risk as long as we are there behind them to take them out

when their overnight obligation comes due the next day.

        MR. LACKER. So, if I can just follow up, my understanding is that tri-party repos are

exempt from the automatic stay, so it is not filing per se that is the risk. It's the risk that they

don't have the cash, right?

        MR. DUDLEY. Well, I'm not sure about that. I thought that there was an issue about

broker-dealer filing. I know that the clearing banks are certainly quite nervous about that

eventuality, but I'm not a lawyer.

        MR. PARKINSON. The repos are exempt from the automatic stay provisions of the

bankruptcy code. But if Lehman had gone into SIPA liquidation, they could have been subject to

a SIPA stay.

        MR. LACKER. All right. Then a question about the TSLF. Is it this program in which

we provide Treasuries?

        MR. DUDLEY. We give them Treasuries, and they give us other stuff. You know, this

will also probably be helpful this week in providing more Treasuries to the market. There was a

tremendous amount of Treasury fails yesterday. So this mechanism does two things. It takes

illiquid collateral from the dealers, and it also supplies a lot of Treasuries to the market, which

should help improve the market function in Treasuries.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions? Bill, would you be able to talk a bit about

the need for swaps?

        MR. DUDLEY. I have just sketchy details based on a phone call, so this may not be

quite right. But my understanding is that this morning Norway put in place a facility by which
September 16, 2008                                                                         10 of 108



they are going to offer their banks dollars, up to $5 billion, on a one-week term--sort of an open

facility. The fact that Norway is doing this suggests that the situation has broadened quite a bit

further because this is the first time that we have heard about Norway in this story, except for

maybe some exposures to the Icelandic banks.

       I have had some conversations with my counterparts at the ECB this morning--this is at

a staff level, so I can't really say what would happen if you were to take this up the chain of

command. But certainly, at least on a preliminary basis, there is quite a bit of interest in having a

similar facility for the ECB, which would not be a TAF loan type of facility but more of an open

facility where European banks could come and get dollars. This would reassure people that

dollar liquidity was available in Europe throughout the European day. My advice to you is that

this is probably a good idea in this environment because we are seeing that the lack of dollar

liquidity in Europe is really having a feedback effect on people's willingness to do business with

one other in the broader markets. I think we should be open to doing this with the ECB and

perhaps with the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan as well--at least have the ability to do

it should it prove necessary.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. You had a two-hander, Governor Kohn?

       MR. KOHN. Just to note that we did have a discussion of foreign exchange swaps in the

Committee on the Global Financial System a week and a half ago, and the general consensus was

that these had been very handy in damping pressures in money markets--dollar funding markets

in particular--when the foreign exchange swap market isn't working very well in Europe and in

Switzerland. The central banks around the table, which are all the major central banks, are quite

supportive of expanding the facility. We were talking about putting something on a standby
September 16, 2008                                                                           11 of 108



basis for use in situations just like this. So the other central banks view this as very helpful to

them in containing pressures in their own markets.

          MR. DUDLEY. The Bank of Japan has requested at the staff level to set up a facility that

would be on the shelf for year-end because the Japanese are quite worried that their banks are

going to face a dollar funding problem at year-end. Now, this preceded the recent crisis, so even

before this last week they were concerned that the Japanese banks could potentially have

problems, and they were interested in exploring with us having a facility in place. We were

actually going to pursue this, and I hope we will have more at the October FOMC meeting if not

sooner.

          CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Bill, if we were going to take action today, what would you

recommend in terms of counterparties? Should we say an unlimited amount? Should we specify

an amount? Can we leave the time open? What are your recommendations on all those

dimensions?

          MR. DUDLEY. Certainly you want to make it pretty broad. You want to make it to the

Bank of England, Switzerland, the ECB, the Bank of Japan, potentially Canada. I would leave it

to their discretion if they would like to participate. I would make the offer to them; and if they

want to participate, then we should be willing to do that. In terms of size, I think it is really

important that you don't create notions of capacity limits because the market then can always try

to test those. Either the numbers have to be very, very large, or it should be open ended. I would

suggest that open ended is better because then you really do provide a backstop for the entire

market. As we've seen with the PDCF, if you provide a suitably broad backstop, oftentimes you

don't even actually need to use it to any great degree. So I think that should be the strategy here.

          CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
September 16, 2008                                                                        12 of 108



       MR. LACKER. Remind me again how big the European system of central banks' own

outright holdings of dollar balances are.

       MR. DUDLEY. European banks?

       MR. LACKER. Yes.

       MR. DUDLEY. I don't know.

       MR. LACKER. Central banks.

       MR. DUDLEY. Do you mean in terms of their dollar foreign exchange reserves?

       MR. LACKER. Right. The ECB--they all have their own dollar reserves.

       MR. DUDLEY. I don't have the numbers.

       MR. SHEETS. I believe that number is about $180 billion of dollar reserves in the euro

system. The ECB itself has control of only a fraction of that.

       MR. LACKER. These are held at individual national central banks, so our swap lines to

them aren't approaching that level yet, right?

       MR. DUDLEY. No.

       MR. LACKER. Note here a sense of discomfort with our lending them dollars that they

already have and so our serving as a substitute for their mobilizing their own dollar reserves for

this purpose. Obviously, the demand could swamp their own reserves, and at that point I would

feel differently about this. But my understanding is that the distribution within the European

system of central banks is uneven, and in some sense this just provides them with a way to

circumvent negotiating how those dollars would be distributed from different central banks to

different private-sector banks within their own system. Broadly, I'm uncomfortable with our

playing that role.
September 16, 2008                                                                          13 of 108



       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Whether it's sensible or not, the ECB has made a pretty

strong distinction with us between their foreign exchange reserves and their dollars that they use

in these operations. They really want to keep those segregated. They want, to some extent, to

represent this as being a collaborative effort with the United States as opposed to something they

are taking on their own behalf. From their perspective--actually President Poole raised the same

issue earlier on, and we had this discussion--they seem to put a lot of value on having a distinct

swap line, which symbolizes the cooperation and coordination of the two central banks as

opposed simply to using their own reserves. President Fisher.

       MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I was going to say that we had this discussion before. We

did approve the swap lines. I wonder if you could just summarize for us what you view as the

downside risk to our doing this.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, I don't think there are any significant downside risks.

There are operational issues that Bill Dudley and his team have to worry about. If we extend

funds to the Europeans, which they then relay to their banks, it affects our reserve positions and

affects the management of the federal funds rate and requires sterilization. That's an operational

issue. I suppose, if there were really very large draws, it would begin to affect some of these

balance sheet constraint concerns that we have. I think that is not an entirely separate issue, but

it is certainly one that we are looking at in terms of trying to get interest on reserves and those

other kinds of measures.

       Again, my expectation is that having the facility would in part provide some confidence

over and above how much we actually extend. So I guess the operational issues and the further

draw on the balance sheet would be the downside, but to me, it seems to be a relatively
September 16, 2008                                                                         14 of 108



straightforward step--one we've done in the past and one that has the additional benefit of

indicating global cooperation on these issues.

       MR. DUDLEY. In principle, we could talk to the ECB and other central banks about

having the rate on these swap lines be at a slight penalty relative to normal times to try to

mitigate the potential reserve impact. I mean, it doesn't have to be at 2 percent or 2¼ percent for

overnight funds--it could be somewhat north of that. But if we have a credible backstop, then it

should calm the markets, and then the backstop should not be used. If we have a backstop and it

actually is used, that is presumably because market conditions are horrific. So in that

environment, you could argue that the reserve-management things are very second order

concerns in some sense.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other comments? All right. Then I'd like to propose that

the FOMC delegate to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee an unspecified authority, in terms of

amount, to offer swaps to foreign central banks as needed to address liquidity pressures in those

other jurisdictions. Those decisions will be made, again, by the Foreign Currency Subcommittee

in consultation with the Open Market Desk. We would keep the FOMC closely informed, and

we would revisit and discuss this issue again in October. Is that an acceptable resolution? Any

amendments to that? Further discussion, comments, or concerns? President Stern.

       MR. STERN. Yes. I am in favor of this. I just wonder how the marketplace will look at

the open-ended nature of this because typically we have dollar magnitudes associated with

swaps. It may all go relatively smoothly; on the other hand, it may raise questions about exactly

what we think the issues are here.
September 16, 2008                                                                          15 of 108



         MR. DUDLEY. Well, I think we are going to have discussions with our foreign

counterparts to decide what the right strategy is. I think right now it is better to have it open

ended.

         MR. STERN. That's fine.

         CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Why don't we have discussions with our counterparties--

we won't announce anything today, I would assume?

         MR. DUDLEY. No, I think they have to take it up the chain of command, just as we do

here. So it's going to take probably a day.

         MR. KOHN. This would come out in the minutes for this meeting.

         CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Right. We'll announce something.

         MR. STERN. But I assume there will be an announcement at some point.

         CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Of course. When would we announce this measure?

         MR. DUDLEY. I think it would be after we've had a chance--I mean, I think we have a

lot of work to do with our foreign counterparties. This was basically raised to me this morning.

         CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. So this is all conditional on agreements and

discussions with other counterparties. We will come up with a joint communication

announcement strategy. President Plosser.

         MR. PLOSSER. I just have one clarification. I have no basic objection to this. I wonder

whether or not, if the FOMC is going to delegate the decision to this group, it is sort of an open-

ended delegation to do this on an ongoing basis. Does it make sense to define a period of time

for which this open-ended delegation is appropriate--that it would expire and would have to be

renewed?
September 16, 2008                                                                        16 of 108



       MR. DUDLEY. Yes. We have authorities extending right now to January 30 for a lot of

these facilities, so that would certainly be a reasonable time frame, I think.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Existing facilities go to January 31, is that right?

       MR. MADIGAN. January 30.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. January 30. Would that be acceptable?

       MR. PLOSSER. Yes. I think it ought to have a termination point so that, if we wanted to

renew it, we would be free to do so, but it wouldn't last forever.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Of course.

       MR. KOHN. One more clarification, Mr. Chairman--this is intended for G-10 central

banks, to include the ECB. Just to be clear, if somebody asks, this is not to give to central banks

of emerging-market economies.

       MR. DUDLEY. I presume so.

       MR. KOHN. I think we should presume so. If the other were to happen, we would come

back to the Committee.

       MR. DUDLEY. Yes, this is about the major financial centers and the ability of large

banks that operate globally to obtain dollar funding.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. So I amend the proposal to terminate on January 30.

President Lacker.

       MR. LACKER. Could I hear a little more about the benefits of an open-ended

commitment? All of our programs have been capped at a certain size. You said something about

"test the limits," and it makes me think of foreign exchange regimes. What kind of scenario do you

have in mind?
September 16, 2008                                                                             17 of 108



        MR. DUDLEY. I think a lot of the programs that we have are actually open ended. The

discount window is open ended in the sense that it's limited only by the amount of collateral that the

banks post there. The Primary Dealer Credit Facility is open ended in that it is limited only by the

size of the tri-party repo system. My point here is that, if foreign banks worry about capacity limits,

even having a large program could in principle not be sufficient in extremis. But if the program is

open ended, the rollover risk problem goes away. If I lend you more dollars today, I don't have to

worry about getting those dollars back because I always know that the facility is there. So it's really

the elimination of the ability to flatten out your position if you need to in terms of your dollar

exposures.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. It's not open ended in the sense that it is not an open window

that anybody can come to and take. It just gives us the authority to adjust the amount.

        MR. LACKER. So you will set a definite amount?

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We will certainly negotiate with the other central banks and

tell them what we're doing now. But we want to have the flexibility in case of an emergency to

respond, and we also don't want to communicate to the markets somehow that we have a hard limit

that is not going to be changed. That would be potentially bad for confidence.

        MR. LACKER. But we will communicate a program size?

        MR. DUDLEY. I think that remains to be discussed with our counterparties. I think we

need to have discussions about what would be most effective. Would a big size that's fixed in

quantity be most effective? Would an open limit be most effective? I think we have to have those

discussions. I think the important thing here--and what we're going for--is credibility. In a crisis

you need enough force--more force than the market thinks is necessary to solve the problem--and

we're going to have to have discussions to determine how much is enough force.
September 16, 2008                                                                         18 of 108



       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think it is mostly a communication issue. Anything else?

All right. Do you want to call the roll on this one?

       MR. KOHN. So move.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We need a second.

       MR. FISHER. Second.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. Thank you.

       MR. PLOSSER. Can we read the resolution?

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The resolution is to provide to the Foreign Currency

Subcommittee the authority to enter into swap agreements with the foreign central banks as needed

to address strains in money markets in other jurisdictions. This will be done in cooperation with the

Open Market Desk and in consultation with those other central banks. The amounts are unlimited

in principle, but the decisions will be made by the Foreign Currency Subcommittee as needed and

as appropriate for the particular circumstances. The FOMC is providing this authority through

January 30. It will, of course, be open to discussion at any meeting.

       MR. PLOSSER. As actions are taken, presumably you'll circulate the outcomes of these

decisions to this Committee in advance of any announcements?.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Of course. All right. Let's take a vote.

       MS. DANKER.

               Chairman Bernanke                        Yes
               First Vice President Cumming             Yes
               Governor Duke                            Yes
               President Fisher                         Yes
               Governor Kohn                            Yes
               Governor Kroszner                        Yes
               President Pianalto                       Yes
               President Plosser                        Yes
               President Stern                          Yes
               Governor Warsh                           Yes
September 16, 2008                                                                            19 of 108



       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Brian, have you circulated the statement?

       MR. MADIGAN. Yes, Mr. Chairman. Everybody should have it.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Has everyone a copy of that? Good. Before we get started on

that, I just want to comment that we may want to say something in the statement about financial

conditions, but we'll come back to that later. We need also now a vote to ratify the domestic open

market operations.

       MR. KOHN. So move.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any objections? Okay. Thank you. Let's turn now to the

economic situation. Dave Stockton and Nathan Sheets.

       MR. STOCKTON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In response to your request for
   some economy in our remarks this morning, I'm going to set aside my prepared remarks
   and just hit some of the highlights here. We did receive a great deal of macroeconomic
   data since we closed the Greenbook last Wednesday. We didn't seem to get any of it
   right, but it all netted out to just about nothing. [Laughter] Retail sales came in
   considerably weaker than we had anticipated, enough by themselves to have knocked
   about ½ percentage point off third-quarter GDP growth. But some of that was offset in
   higher retail inventories, and the rest was offset by a stronger-than-expected
   merchandise trade report for July. It all left us still feeling very comfortable with our
   forecast because it looks to us as though economic growth is going to drop below
   1 percent on average in the second half of the year.

        In terms of the things that really have stood out over the intermeeting period, at least
   to my mind, one has been the weakness in consumption. As I indicated, the retail sales
   report was weak; and now with that report in hand, we'd probably mark down our
   current-quarter consumption forecast to a decline of 1½ percent at an annual rate. What
   I think is really remarkable about that is that this weakness is occurring even though we
   still think spending is probably receiving some boost from the rebates. So excluding
   that effect, we'd be looking at something even weaker. Now, as you know, we've been
   head-faked a number of times by the retail sales data, which are subject to some pretty
   substantial revisions. So I wouldn't necessarily take that report at face value. But the
   drop we've seen in motor vehicle purchases pretty much mirrors in size and timing the
   kind of falloff that we've seen in overall consumption spending. So it looks like a very
   weak picture for consumption.

       The other notable development over the intermeeting period has been the weakness
   in the labor markets--now not principally in the payroll employment figures. Private
   payroll employment has been falling pretty sharply but not any faster than we would
September 16, 2008                                                                           20 of 108



   have thought. But the rise in the unemployment rate is remarkable. Now, some of the
   0.4 percentage point increase in the unemployment rate last month could be statistical
   noise. It wouldn't be entirely surprising to see it fall back some. But the more than 1
   percentage point rise that we've had since April is not going to be statistical noise.
   Some of that increase probably reflects a bigger response to the emergency
   unemployment compensation program than we previously thought, and we've upped
   our estimates for that to a little less than 0.3 percentage point on the level of the
   unemployment rate. But even putting that aside, we have experienced a more significant
   rise in the unemployment rate, and I think that's consistent with other things that we're
   seeing in terms of the labor market data. We've seen another appreciable jump in initial
   claims. Announced job cuts are up. Job openings are down. Survey hiring plans have
   softened.

        Now, this sharp rise in the unemployment rate is a bit difficult to square with a GDP
   figure that looks as though it was running above 3 percent in the second quarter and
   even 2 percent if you want to average the first and second quarters together. There are
   occasionally large errors in Okun's law, as I think I've noted in the past. It seems as
   though Okun's law gets obeyed about as frequently as the 55 mile an hour speed limit
   on I-95. [Laughter] But still, one of the things that we should probably be considering
   is that perhaps the economy has not been as strong as suggested by the real GDP figures.
   Real gross domestic income, which is output measured on the income side of the
   accounts, has risen about 2 percentage points less than GDP over the past year. And if
   we look at industrial production and compare that with the components of GDP that are,
   in essence, goods production, there's about a 1 percentage point discrepancy there, with
   industrial production suggesting weaker figures than GDP.

       We see no reason to discount the rise in the unemployment rate as suggesting that
   we're entering the second half with more labor market slack than we had previously
   thought. Furthermore, on net, we've revised down our projected growth in GDP over
   the next two years--admittedly just a bit--and that was in response to two pretty strong
   crosscurrents. One was the significantly lower oil prices that we have in this forecast.
   We do think they're going to provide some support to underlying disposable income and
   spending. But the positive effect of that on our forecast going forward was more than
   offset by a significant marking down in our forecast for net exports--which Nathan will
   be discussing--in response to an appreciation of the dollar and a further downward
   revision to our outlook for foreign activity. On net, that left us with a little lower growth
   rate and carrying forward a noticeably higher unemployment rate over the forecast
   period. Now, those were pretty small adjustments. I don't think we've seen a
   significant change in the basic outlook, and certainly the story behind our forecast is
   very similar to the one that we had last time, which is that we're still expecting a very
   gradual pickup in GDP growth over the next year and a little more rapid pickup in 2010.

       The three things that are absolutely central to producing that outcome are our
   projection that we're going to get a stabilization in housing in 2009--and early in 2009;
   that there will be some diminishment of the drag on growth from the financial
   turbulence; and that oil prices flatten out. Of those three, to my mind, the component
September 16, 2008                                                                           21 of 108



   that probably is most central and most important would be seeing some stabilization in
   the housing market, not only because this has been a big drag on growth and will also
   have consequences for household wealth but also because if there's going to be some
   clarity and reassurance to financial market participants, it seems as though some end to
   the housing debacle has to be in sight. We think we are seeing a few glimmers of hope
   there--however, we thought that on occasion in the past and have been proven wrong.
   But sales of existing homes have been flat since the turn of the year. Sales of new
   homes have been flat for several months now. We've had a drop in mortgage interest
   rates that followed the takeover of Fannie and Freddie. Starts have fallen so much now
   that, in fact, builders are making significant progress in working down the inventory of
   unsold new homes and even months' supply has tipped down of late. So we think that
   some things are looking a little better for us there. As a consequence, we're expecting to
   see some bottoming-out near the end of this year or the beginning of next year--but not
   a sharp recovery. Overall residential investment actually is still a negative for 2009 but
   less of a negative than it has been this year. As you know from the Greenbook, our
   estimates suggest that the financial restraints on overall activity--actually on the level of
   GDP--will increase between 2008 and 2009, but their effects on the growth rate of GDP
   are diminishing somewhat. Finally, with regard to oil prices, by our assessment the rise
   in crude oil prices since the beginning of 2006 is probably knocking about ½ percentage
   point off growth in 2008; and with a flattening out of oil prices, we expect that to be
   more of a neutral factor over the next two years. That's providing some impetus. A lot
   of what's going on in our forecast is bad things not worsening any more quickly next
   year than they did this year, rather than things actually getting better. I guess it's a sad
   comment that we're relying on second derivatives turning positive to be the main force
   generating some upward impetus to economic growth. But we are projecting a gradual
   pickup.

        Now, on the inflation side, this morning's CPI report for August actually came in a
   little better than we were expecting. The CPI in August fell 0.1 percent. We had been
   expecting an increase of 0.1 percent. That surprise was all in the energy component, but
   we at least did see some moderation in the retail food price side that we were looking
   for, and the change in core CPI fell back to 0.2 percent after a string of 0.3 percent
   increases. I don't think these data will do much to change our basic forecast, which is
   for total PCE prices to be up somewhere in the neighborhood of a 5 percent rate in the
   third quarter, and core prices up 3 percent. Still, if one looks back at the last few CPIs
   and PCEs, things have come in a little higher on the core side. The projected 3 percent
   increase is up about ¼ percentage point from where we were in our August forecast, and
   our interpretation of this is that we're probably seeing more upward impetus and pass-
   through from the higher energy prices, other commodity prices, and imports than we had
   previously expected. That certainly squares with what we're hearing from our business
   contacts. It also squares with what we saw last week in the PPI, which was another very
   sharp increase in prices of intermediate materials. At least going forward, for the first
   time since this process got under way, we are seeing more than just a futures price
   forecast flattening out. Some easing in the prices of both oil and other commodities and
   the appreciation of the dollar are giving us at least a little more confidence that some of
   these cost pressures are going to abate going forward and that we will get the disinflation
September 16, 2008                                                                           22 of 108



   that we have been forecasting. We continue to see reasonably encouraging signs on
   inflation expectations. The medium-term and long-term inflation expectations in the
   preliminary Michigan report last week dropped 0.3 percentage point, to 2.9 percent.
   TIPS haven't really done very much, and hourly labor compensation continues to come
   in below our expectations. So based on our assessment, once these cost pressures work
   their way through the system--and we still think that the process will take place over the
   second half--we think that we'll get some receding of core inflation from the 2.4
   percent that we're projecting for this year to 2.1 percent next year and 1.9 percent in
   2010.

       Just a couple of final remarks on current events. Hurricanes Gustav and Ike
   obviously created an enormous amount of devastation for a whole lot of people, but they
   don't really appear to us to have significant macroeconomic consequences. There will
   be some temporary disruption to oil and gas extraction and refining, but it looks as
   though the basic infrastructure has largely been spared. I'll be interested to hear
   President Fisher's report. Retail gasoline prices have jumped in the last few days, but
   wholesale prices for delivery in October are actually lower than they were before the
   storms were on the horizon. I think that suggests that this is not going to be a major
   negative event. Undoubtedly, industrial production is going to fall like a stone in
   September, reflecting these two hurricanes as well as the Boeing strike, but we're
   expecting that to bounce right back again. I don't really have anything useful to say
   about the economic consequences of the financial developments of the past few days. I
   must say I'm not feeling very well about it at the present, but I'm not sure whether that
   reflects rational economic analysis or the fact that I've had too many meals out of the
   vending machines downstairs in the last few days. [Laughter] But in any event, we're
   obviously going to need to wait a bit to see how the dust settles here, but I think the sign
   would be obviously in a bad direction. I'll turn over the floor to Nathan.

       MR. SHEETS. I also will be very brief in summarizing economic developments
   abroad. Indeed, I would just like to make six very brief points. The first one is that the
   incoming data we've received since the last Greenbook for the foreign economies have
   been extraordinarily soft. Indeed, we've marked down our forecast or projection of the
   second quarter by a full percentage point. The data also suggest that we should carry
   forward a fair amount of that softness at least through the next year. So our foreign
   outlook is much softer than it was before.

       The second point is that this softening outlook in our view has been a key factor that
   has contributed to further sizable declines in oil and commodity prices. This morning,
   oil prices were trading around $92 a barrel, which was down another $25 a barrel from
   where we were at the time of the last meeting.

       The third point is that this deteriorating foreign outlook also seems to have triggered
   something of a reassessment in currency markets. Since your last meeting, the dollar
   has strengthened nearly 5 percent in broad nominal terms. In our view, what happened
   in currency markets was that the markets had priced in the expectation that the foreign
   economies would remain quite resilient in the face of a slowing in the United States.
September 16, 2008                                                                          23 of 108



   Now with the incoming data over the past couple of months, it is becoming clearer and
   clearer that the U.S. slowing is going to have a marked effect on these foreign
   economies, and this has shifted the relative attractiveness of the dollar and supported the
   appreciation that we've seen over the last couple of months.

        The fourth point is that, in a number of emerging market economies, we've seen a
   resurgence of certain sorts of financial vulnerabilities. We've seen across really a broad
   array of these economies rising external debt spreads and rising CDS spreads. We've
   seen falling equity prices and, for a number of these economies, downward pressures on
   their currencies. On that last point, a number of the Asians have been intervening in the
   foreign exchange market over the intermeeting period but have actually been intervening
   to try to prevent their currencies from depreciating, which is a marked change from what
   we've seen in the last couple of years.

       The fifth point is that the surprisingly strong performance of U.S. exports that we've
   seen appears to have continued through July. After the Greenbook went to bed, we got
   the July trade data, and they continue to point to a fair amount of strength in the export
   sector. It was particularly strong in the auto sector, but it was a broad-based strength
   through July. Nevertheless, our view is that, given the rise in the dollar and the
   softening outlook for foreign growth, we're very likely to see some slowing in export
   growth going forward.

       The final point I'd like to mention is that, also late last week after the Greenbook
   went to bed, we received data on import prices. These data, really for the first time in a
   long time, showed a marked deceleration in both material-intensive goods import prices
   and finished goods import prices. Our forecast for a long time has called for a
   deceleration in import prices in line with the projected flattening out of commodity
   prices and a projected flattening out of the dollar.

        Now it seems that we're at a point at which all those things that have been
   incorporated into our forecast but we haven't had a lot of evidence for are starting to
   materialize. We have the dollar flattened out and, indeed, somewhat stronger than in the
   last Greenbook. We have lower paths for commodity prices, and then the data that we
   recently received showed an actual deceleration in core import prices, which gives us
   some confidence that perhaps the rise in those import prices has peaked. I'll stop there.

      CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Are there questions for Dave and Nathan?

      MR. FISHER. Could I ask just one question, Mr. Chairman?

      CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.

      MR. FISHER. Could you interpret for us the Bank of China's cut in the bank lending rate?
September 16, 2008                                                                           24 of 108



       MR. SHEETS. Yes. Yesterday the PBOC cut its main policy rate 27 basis points. I guess

they felt that 26 would not have been enough and 28 would have been too much. [Laughter] And

27 was just the right number. I'd say a couple of thoughts were there. One important point is that

inflation in China has decelerated significantly. In the spring they were looking at twelve-month

inflation rates of around 8.3 percent. The latest reading for August was 4.9 percent. So it's clearly

on a decelerating trajectory. That has been driven by a marked decline in food prices. Earlier this

year, food prices were moving up at over a 20 percent rate, and now it is about 10 percent. So the

deceleration in prices; some concerns about where activity is going, particularly in the aftermath of

the Olympics; and signs of slowing external demand have given them the scope they need to cut

policy rates. Besides the cut in monetary policy, we're also hearing reports that the authorities are

poised to implement fiscal stimulus if that's necessary.

       MR. FISHER. Thank you.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Three is a lucky number in China. Don was going to tell you

that 3 cubed is 27. [Laughter].

       MR. KOHN. He was also going to wonder, Mr. Chairman, whether we needed to harness

the mystical powers. [Laughter]

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think we have good feng shui here.

       MR. SHEETS. The science of monetary policy.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other deep questions for our colleagues? I'm a little

surprised.

       MR. PLOSSER. We're all trying to be brief, Mr. Chairman.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Everyone has been very brief. I'm shocked. [Laughter] My

proposal, which I can be argued out of, is to do one round, if that's acceptable. Please indicate your
September 16, 2008                                                                             25 of 108



preliminary view on policy, and you will have another opportunity to refine and extend your views.

Is that acceptable with everybody?

           MR. KROSZNER. Should we have Brian's presentation?

           CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, of course. I was about to turn to that. If that's

acceptable, let's turn to Brian and have your discussion.

            MR. MADIGAN. 2 I will be referring to the package labeled "Material for
       FOMC Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives and Trial Run Survey Results."
       The results of the survey are shown in exhibit 2. In the interest of time, I will not
       cover them this morning. The Subcommittee on Communications plans to be in
       touch with the Committee on this issue over the upcoming intermeeting period.

           The first page of the package reproduces the version of table 1 that you received
       yesterday afternoon. This version includes three policy alternatives. As in the
       Bluebook, alternative B would leave the stance of policy unchanged at this meeting,
       and alternative C would involve a 25 basis point firming today. However, alternative
       A now entails a 25 basis point policy easing rather than the unchanged funds rate that
       was specified in the Bluebook version of this alternative.

           I will begin by discussing alternative C. The discussion at your last meeting
       suggested that you generally saw the next move in policy as likely to be a firming, a
       point that was explicit in the minutes of the meeting. Even though market volatility
       and financial strains have increased notably in recent weeks, you might view those
       developments as having only limited implications for the economic outlook and
       hence see economic fundamentals as continuing to suggest that policy should soon be
       firmed. Inflation has been well above the rates that Committee members judge as
       appropriate for the longer run, and despite lower oil prices and greater slack in labor
       markets, there remains considerable uncertainty about how soon and how much core
       inflation will slow. In these circumstances, you may believe that a firming of policy
       is appropriate.

           Under the version of alternative B distributed yesterday evening, the Committee
       would hold the target funds rate constant at this meeting, and the statement would
       suggest that the Committee sees the risks to growth and inflation as roughly balanced.
       You may believe that this combination is appropriate for this meeting if your modal
       outlook for the economy has not changed much since the last meeting and if you
       judge that the upside risks to inflation have diminished, given the sharp drop in
       energy prices, the decline in indicators of inflation expectations, and the greater
       economic slack implied by the recent unexpectedly sharp jump in the unemployment
       rate. You might also believe that the downside risks to growth have increased as a
       result of the recent increase in financial strains. But at the same time, you may want
2
    The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 2).
September 16, 2008                                                                          26 of 108



   to let the dust settle a bit before concluding that these developments warrant an
   adjustment in your policy stance. In particular, you may think there is a good chance
   that the latest enhancements to the Federal Reserve's special liquidity facilities will
   help keep markets functioning and mitigate the risks to growth.

       Relative to the Bluebook version, the language of alternative B has been revised
   in three material ways. First, B2 now notes that "strains in financial markets have
   intensified." Second, the clause "some indicators of inflation expectations have been
   elevated" has been dropped from B3 in view of the recent declines in inflation
   compensation and survey measures of inflation expectations. Finally, the first
   sentence of B4 has been revised to suggest that the Committee now sees the
   significant risks to growth and inflation as roughly balanced. Given market
   participants' expectation that the funds rate could trade soft to the target for a time in
   light of recent developments, gauging exactly what is built into markets for the
   outcome of today's meeting is difficult. But earlier this morning, market prices
   appeared to incorporate high odds of at least a 25 basis point easing today or possibly
   more. Thus markets might well see a decision to keep the funds rate constant and to
   make no appreciable change to the language of the statement as signaling less
   concern about financial developments than they anticipated.

       If you saw recent developments as significantly boosting the downside risks to
   growth or noticeably lowering the modal outlook, you might consider easing the
   federal funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting, as in alternative A. The rationale
   language for this action would begin by noting that strains in financial markets have
   increased significantly and would go on to indicate that the policy action should help
   to promote moderate growth over time. The Committee would cite the recent decline
   in energy and other commodity prices and the increased slack in resource utilization
   as factors that are expected to foster a moderation of inflation. The risk assessment
   would indicate that "the downside risks to growth have intensified, but the upside
   risks to inflation remain a concern to the Committee." With a policy easing largely
   built into markets, shorter-term interest rates would likely decline modestly in
   response to such an action, depending on how much is built in, or they might be little
   changed. As the Chairman indicated earlier in the meeting, adjustments to the
   statement could be considered in light of the further volatility in markets over the past
   day. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

       MR. DUDLEY. If I could add a few thoughts on market expectations about this meeting--I

think it looks as though easing is priced in for two reasons. One, dealers do expect the federal funds

rate to trade soft as we add excess reserves, so I would not take the softness in the September federal

funds futures contract as indicative of necessarily expecting an easing. Two, I think it is important

to recognize that the rates embodied in those fed fund futures contracts are means not modes. So I
September 16, 2008                                                                            27 of 108



would characterize the market expectation as either that things get very, very bad and the FOMC

cuts rates significantly or that the FOMC does nothing.

        I think that actually a 25 basis point cut is probably the least likely outcome that the market

anticipates. As evidence of this, a couple of dealers yesterday did change their forecast to a 50 basis

point rate cut. I'm not aware of anybody who has changed to 25. Probably people like that are out

there. I know that my colleagues at Goldman Sachs, where I used to work, are saying that they

think the FOMC is going to keep rates unchanged today but, if they were to move, it would be 50.

That gives you a sense that it's really a bimodal kind of view and that putting different probabilities

on 50 and zero gives you some easing priced into the federal funds rate futures market. So I think

the consensus view still in the marketplace is that the Fed probably will not cut rates today. That

would be a disappointment to a degree because there's some probability placed on the idea that the

Fed might do 50, but that's how I would interpret what's priced into the markets today.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.

        MR. FISHER. Could I ask for a little clarification here? The indication of sentiment is

important, is it not, in terms of expectations from the population that you're talking about? The

signaling of our direction would be important here?

        MR. DUDLEY. Well, I think the market participants would gain some comfort to the

extent that the Federal Reserve as an institution indicates concern about what's going on in the

financial markets. But in some ways the Desk has already signaled that concern by its intervention,

so I'm not sure that additional indications are needed. But in the language you might want to

indicate to market participants that, if things were to materially worsen in the financial markets, the

Committee might revisit the issue of where the federal funds rate should be.
September 16, 2008                                                                            28 of 108



        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Just on the issue of trading soft, though, the October-

December has also come down, and there is certainly some shift in the actual policy expectation.

        MR. DUDLEY. That is true. I think on Friday the mood was basically that the funds rate

was going to be flat for a long time. Probabilities placed on either easing or tightening were quite

low, and since then the probability of easing has gone up fairly significantly. But I think it's hard to

interpret because it's really not about 25 versus zero. It's really about zero versus 50 or maybe even

100 as you look out longer term. Either the financial system is going to implode in a major way,

which will lead to a significant further easing, or it is not.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions? All right. If not, let's begin with President

Lockhart.

        MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I finalized the thinking that went into my

prepared remarks late last week, which seemed like a good idea at the time. But I should follow

the philosophy of Charlie Brown, who I think said, "Never do today what you can put off until

tomorrow." [Laughter] Obviously, we can't ignore the events of the weekend and yesterday's

financial markets. So late yesterday I reviewed the views that I shaped last week and tried to

ground them in an assessment of whether the outlook for the real economy has changed

materially, whether the balance of risks has been altered, and whether, in my opinion, we must

reintroduce a risk-management approach and consider taking out more insurance.

        With that as prologue, let me make just a couple of comments on regional soundings

from the last couple of weeks. Anecdotal reports from the Sixth District support the view that

the economy is quite weak but not deteriorating markedly. The CFO of a large retailer of

housing-related goods said that they think they see a bottom forming. I am also starting to hear

some reports that housing markets feel as though they are beginning to stabilize; but, really, it is
September 16, 2008                                                                          29 of 108



a little too early to say that a bottom has formed in any of our housing markets. My overall sense

from District contacts and our surveys is of an economy that is quite weak, with no clear trend

evident.

       Turning to the national outlook, like most forecasts, my view on the likely path for the

economy has not changed materially since our August meeting. I see nothing in the data and

hear nothing from District reports that alters my views that the second half will be very weak. I

expect this weak period to be followed by a slow recovery gathering in 2009, but the foundation

of a recovery starting around year-end or early 2009 may be far from solid. The contraction of

credit availability that is confirmed by both surveys and anecdotal evidence could deepen as

financial institutions face tight liquidity and difficulty recapitalizing. A protracted credit crunch

would likely operate as a substantial drag on the economy.

       Consistent with the Greenbook, I expect some near-term improvement in headline

inflation, as we saw this morning, some near-term deterioration of core inflation measures, and

inflation moving in the right direction later this year and into next year. That said, one director

said that he and his particular industry had seen no moderation of price increases up to this date.

I am comforted somewhat that the upward drift in some inflation expectation measures appears

to have been reversed. In addition, my staff has been monitoring revisions to inflation forecasts

of professional forecasters, which also seem to suggest that concerns about accelerating inflation

have abated somewhat.

       Regarding the balance of risks in the economy, I am concerned that the downside risks to

growth may be gathering force, as evidenced by the weakening personal consumption and retail

sales data, the weakening economies of export partners, and the delicate state of the financial

markets. At the same time, I perceive that there is significant risk that the current disinflationary
September 16, 2008                                                                          30 of 108



environment may fail to bring core inflation down to anything resembling acceptable levels for

the longer term. Adding up all of this, I perceive a very rough balance of risks that could break

either way in coming months.

       My view of the appropriate policy path is consistent with the Greenbook--that the fed

funds rate target will remain stable at or close to the current level for several months going into

2009. My preference is to hold the fed funds rate at the current level of 2 percent. Among the

reasons is that a ¼ percentage point drop, as suggested by alternative A, is really not clearly

called for by a changed outlook for the real economy. Inflation risks are still in play, and I think

we should give credit markets more time to digest events and sort out rate relationships.

       As regards the statement, my preference is alternative B. However, I am concerned that

the reference to the recent financial turbulence is not quite strong enough, so I took a shot at

rephrasing just the beginning of the rationale section to read as such: "Economic growth appears

to have slowed recently, and labor markets have weakened further. In addition, strains in

financial markets have increased significantly"--basically taking the slightly stronger expression

in the alternative A rationale and putting it in alternative B. So my position, Mr. Chairman, is to

hold at this meeting. Thank you very much.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Rosengren.

       MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be brief. This is already a

historic week, and the week has just begun. The labor market is weak and getting weaker. The

unemployment rate has risen 1.1 percentage points since April and is likely to rise further. I am

not convinced that the unemployment rate will level off where the Greenbook is assuming

currently. The failure of a major investment bank, the forced merger of another, the largest thrift

and insurer teetering, and the failure of Freddie and Fannie are likely to have a significant impact
September 16, 2008                                                                         31 of 108



on the real economy. Individuals and firms will become risk averse, with reluctance to consume

or to invest. Even if firms were inclined to invest, credit spreads are rising, and the cost and

availability of financing is becoming more difficult. Many securitization vehicles are frozen.

The degree of financial distress has risen markedly. Deleveraging is likely to occur with a

vengeance as firms seek to survive this period of significant upheaval. Given that many

borrowers will face higher interest rates as a result of financial problems, we can help offset this

additional drag by reducing the federal funds rate. I support alternative A to reduce the fed funds

rate 25 basis points. Thank you.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig.

       MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I see no reason to focus on the details of the forecast.

Clearly, the economy is under stress, both as we look at the economic growth forecast and as we

look at the inflation forecast. So I recognize the amount of stress we are under here. I would say

to you, in dealing with that stress, I am fully supportive of the actions that we take in terms of

liquidity--the TAF and the other efforts to provide liquidity into the market. These are tools that

we can and should use for these kinds of shocks in a short-term context. On the other hand, I

would encourage the Committee to resist the impulse to ease policy in a sense of doing

something. The issue is not the level of our policy rate at this time. It is the dysfunctioning of

the markets that we hope our liquidity efforts will help address. To begin to talk about easing or

even to put language in there that suggests easing is to cause people, on the expectation that we

might ease at some point even if we hold off now, to delay decisions that they would otherwise

make that would benefit the economy.

       I also encourage us to look beyond the immediate crisis, which I recognize is serious.

But as pointed out here, we also have an inflation issue. Our core inflation is still above where it
September 16, 2008                                                                           32 of 108



should be. Headline inflation has been up, even though there are some signs that commodities

and energy are backing off. But the businesses themselves are saying, "How do I recover my

margin?" So there is no impulse to pass along those reductions. We talk about wages and labor

backing off. But they are holding off, they are not backing off, and in negotiations they are

much more antagonistic. Those kinds of pressures will emerge at some point. Those are the

longer-run issues that I think we need to keep in mind as we deal with this immediate crisis. So I

would strongly encourage us to leave rates where they are, to be very careful with our language,

not to encourage the expectation of further rate decreases, and to continue to be aggressive in our

liquidity provisions as we have been the last several weeks and months. Thank you.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen.

       MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. During the past several weeks, my head

office and Branch directors have become decidedly more pessimistic about the economic

outlook. My own assessment of incoming data coincides with theirs. My contacts also report

that their businesses are still raising prices in response to past increases in commodity and import

prices that boosted their costs. I expect as a consequence that core inflation will remain

uncomfortably high for a while longer, but the marked decline in commodity prices since June

reinforces my conviction that there is light at the end of this inflation tunnel.

       With respect to growth, our forecast is similar to the Greenbook's, with a little more

weakness in the second half of this year and a little more strength in 2009. I think the risks to

this forecast are decidedly skewed to the downside. I agree with the Greenbook's assessment

that the strength we saw in the upwardly revised real GDP growth in the second quarter will not

hold up. Despite the tax rebates, real personal consumption expenditures declined in both June

and July, and retail sales were down in August. My contacts report that cutbacks in spending are
September 16, 2008                                                                       33 of 108



widespread, especially for discretionary items. For example, East Bay plastic surgeons and

dentists note that patients are deferring elective procedures. [Laughter] Reservations are no

longer necessary at many high-end restaurants. And the Silicon Valley Country Club, with a

$250,000 entrance fee and seven-to-eight-year waiting list, has seen the number of would-be new

members shrink to a mere thirteen. [Laughter]

       Exports were a huge source of strength in the second quarter, but I am concerned that we

cannot count on very large contributions to growth from exports going forward, now that the

dollar has begun to rise and economic growth abroad has slowed, even turning negative in some

important trade partners. Indeed, the growing weakness of the global outlook appears to be an

important explanation for the reversion in commodity prices, and this adds a dimension of gloom

to what would otherwise be a decided plus for both inflation and demand.

       Recent data also suggest that labor markets are weakening across the board--a

development that will cast a pall on household income and spending. The interaction of higher

unemployment with the housing and financial markets raises the potential for even worse

news--namely, an intensification of the adverse feedback loop we have long worried about and

are now experiencing. Indeed, delinquencies have risen substantially across the spectrum of

consumer loans, and credit availability continues to decline. One ray of hope is that the changes

at Fannie and Freddie have caused a notable drop in mortgage rates. Another is that the decline

in home prices has become somewhat less steep, and we have seen an outright improvement in

home inventories relative to sales. But my contacts are very pessimistic about the prospects for

nonresidential construction. They note that construction is continuing on projects in the pipeline

with committed funding, but new projects are all but impossible to finance.
September 16, 2008                                                                           34 of 108



       Turning to inflation, I have long anticipated and still expect that inflation will fall to

more-reasonable levels in 2009. However, developments since our August meeting diminish the

upside risks to this projection. The drop in oil and other commodity prices, along with the

appreciation of the dollar, should work to moderate the current inflation bulge and diminish the

potential for a wage­price spiral to develop. Import inflation has already begun to ease.

Furthermore, we have seen a remarkable decline in inflation compensation for the next five years

in the TIPS market. I would not rely heavily on this decline to support my view, but I do have to

say that the decline is a lot more reassuring than the alternative. I was also encouraged by the

30 basis point drop in long-term inflation expectations in the most recent Michigan survey. I

anticipate that the recent jump in the unemployment rate will place some additional downward

pressure on growth in labor compensation, which has been quite low, and in core inflation.

Although the jump in the unemployment rate probably partly reflects the extension of

unemployment insurance coverage, a back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that the upper

bound on this effect is just a few tenths of a percent. I would agree with the Greenbook

estimates. We have also examined the possibility that the increase in unemployment reflects a

rise in the NAIRU due to sectoral employment shifts out of construction and finance and into

other industries. Ned Phelps has argued that the sectoral shift story implies a sizable dispersion

of employment growth across industries and states. But we looked at these data and found no

significant increase, so I don't find this Phelps argument particularly convincing. Considering

all of these factors, I expect both headline and core PCE price inflation to fall to about 2 percent

for 2009 as a whole, and I see the risks to this projection as roughly balanced.

       With respect to policy, I would be inclined to keep the funds rate target at 2 percent

today. For now, it seems to me that the additional liquidity measures that have been put in place
September 16, 2008                                                                        35 of 108



are an appropriate response to the turmoil. I am fine with the wording of alternative B and

would support President Lockhart's suggestion for change. That would seem fine to me, too. In

view of the intensified financial stress and the potential for more turmoil, obviously I think we

will need to be flexible in setting policy going forward, and I am very concerned about downside

risks to the real economy and think that inflation risk is diminished.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Bullard.

       MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to start with the national

economy in the interest of brevity here. Concerning the national outlook, it is difficult and

probably unwise to try to assess growth and inflation prospects in the immediate aftermath of an

event like the Lehman bankruptcy. I expect to see more failures among financial firms, and I

expect those failures to continue to contribute to market volatility. This is part of an ongoing

shakeout among financial market firms, following some of the worst risk management in a

generation. I expect sluggish growth in the second half of 2008, in part due to labor markets that

are somewhat weaker than expected. Financial market turmoil is certainly a key concern, but the

U.S. economy still outperformed expectations in the first half of 2008, despite the demise of Bear

Stearns--an event not too different in some respects from the current episode.

       My sense is that three large uncertainties looming over the economy have now been

resolved--the GSEs and the fates of Lehman and Merrill Lynch. Of these, the resolution of GSE

uncertainty seems to be the most pivotal, even though it is not the one leading the news today.

Normally, the elimination of key uncertainties is a plus for the economy. As is typical in this

type of situation, safe interest rates have fallen dramatically across the board.

       A second macroeconomic shock stemming from the dramatic rise in oil and other

commodities prices has been an unwelcome development during the past six months. The retreat
September 16, 2008                                                                        36 of 108



of West Texas intermediate prices to $94 a barrel, and today down to $92 a barrel, should

improve second-half growth prospects.

       Meanwhile, an inflation problem is brewing. The headline CPI inflation rate, the one

consumers actually face, is about 6¼ percent year-to-date. That does not include today's report.

This is against the federal funds target of 2 percent. While it makes sense to focus on financial

markets for the time being, it is essential that we keep in position to put downward pressure on

inflation going forward. The financial crisis threatens to roll on for such a long time and to

demand so much attention that the private sector may rationally conclude that we have lost all

sight of our inflation objective. In such a case of unmoored expectations, outcomes could be far

more severe than those envisioned in the Greenbook.

       My policy preference is to maintain the federal funds rate target at the current level and to

wait for some time to assess the impact of the Lehman bankruptcy filing, if any, on the national

economy. In uncertain circumstances like these, I think it would be unwise to react too hastily to

a fluid situation. Any immediate effects may not be the ones that are intended, and further down

the line--that is, once more data have accumulated--a hasty action may leave the Committee out

of position relative to the incoming data. By denying funding to Lehman suitors, the Fed has

begun to reestablish the idea that markets should not expect help at each difficult juncture.

Changing rates today would confuse that important signal and take out much of the positive part

out of the previous decision. In addition, a rate move would be poorly targeted toward

mitigation of difficulties at particular financial firms. The FOMC has already done a great deal

to create a low interest rate environment in order to shepherd the economy through a substantial

shock to the financial and housing sectors. The Committee now needs to allow the financial
September 16, 2008                                                                          37 of 108



sector shakeout to occur using liquidity facilities to the extent possible to help navigate the

resulting turbulence. Thank you.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Plosser.

        MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. New data and survey and anecdotal

information in the Third District suggest that the economy in our District continues to be weak.

There have been further declines in some industries and deceleration of growth in others, but

generally data are coming in as expected. Employment growth was flat over the three-month

period ending in July, and I expect that unemployment rates in our three states will tick up in

August, when the regional data come out, much as it did in the national data.

        Overall, the activity in our region, as I said, has remained weak since the last meeting.

Housing construction continues to be weak. Sales of existing homes remain sluggish, and

inventories remain high. One builder said, "Things don't feel very good. I feel as though I am in

a tar pit. My feet are maybe now on the bottom; my nose is still above the level of the tar; and

while I may feel the bottom, it still doesn't feel very good." On the commercial real estate side,

we saw a slight uptick in the value of July contracts, but they are not very high. In fact, they

really remained at the average level of the last seven years. Retailers remain pessimistic in the

latest Beige Book. District banks saw loans rise slowly but steadily in August. The Beige Book

reports from them see slight gains in consumer and real estate lending and C&I loans essentially

flat.

        The good news is from our business outlook survey for September, which will be

released to the public on Thursday at 10:00 a.m., but the results are in. The survey is from the

first two weeks of September. The general activity index has been negative, if you recall, for the

last nine months--since December 2007. The last value was minus 12.7. The September
September 16, 2008                                                                          38 of 108



number, not to be released until Thursday, is a positive 3.4, so that's a swing of 15 points to the

good. This is clearly somewhat encouraging, although we don't want to get too excited about

one month--but it is good news. Furthermore, both the new orders and shipment indexes in the

survey improved in September. Price pressures have abated somewhat with the fall in

commodities and oil, but they remain. The six-month-ahead outlook indexes also improved

substantially in the new survey. This is the best picture that the survey has painted in certainly

quite a while--about the last six or eight months. In summary, the economic conditions of the

Third District remain weak and sluggish but are not materially different from what we and our

business contacts had been expecting over the near term.

       While a lot of attention in the short run is being paid to financial markets' turmoil, our

decision today must look beyond today's financial markets to the real economy and its prospects

in the future. In this regard, things have not changed very much, at least not yet. Indeed, the

Greenbook forecast has changed only modestly since the last Greenbook. The economy remains

weak but not appreciably different from what I anticipated or even what the Greenbook

anticipated at the last meeting. I agree that the recent financial turmoil may ultimately affect the

outlook in a significant way, but that is far from obvious at this point. We also need to

acknowledge the long lag times associated with the effect of monetary policy actions on the real

economy. Actions today will not help us very much in the very, very near term where the real

economy is concerned.

       On the inflation front, there has been some good news. The decline in the retail price of

gas has contributed to a decline in headline inflation in August. In my view, the price declines in

commodities and oil have mitigated somewhat the upward pressure on expectations and have

reduced the likelihood that inflation expectations will become unanchored, at least in the near
September 16, 2008                                                                        39 of 108



term. Nevertheless, I remain concerned about the inflation outlook going forward. In part, my

concern stems from the fact that I do not see that the ongoing expected slowdown in economic

activity is entirely demand driven. As I noted before, the impact of financial shocks and high

commodity prices can plausibly lead to a decline in the growth rate of potential output. If so,

there will be less offset to inflation going forward than incorporated in the baseline Greenbook

forecast, which relies heavily on slack variables to control inflation. The Greenbook simulation

entitled "costly reallocation" provides some welcome effort from the staff in this regard, and I

appreciate that. Yet the details of that experiment were a bit sketchy for me, and at some point I

would be interested in a little more detail as to how that actually plays out.

       In my view, the main driver for the outlook of future inflation over the next two years is

not, nor has it been, oil prices per se, but the path of monetary policy that the Committee will

adopt over the next several months and quarters. I appreciate the memo that the staff produced

regarding the stance of monetary policy. According to the memo, the current stance of policy is

not unusually accommodative. However, I would like to note that that conclusion depends

critically on the specific forecast and the nature of the FRB/US model. A different model, one

that says that inflation expectations are more forward looking, may well lead to a very different

conclusion. But I take the message of the memo to be that the assessment of the stance of

monetary policy is dependent, at a point in time, on a model, and I very much agree with that

assessment. Given that my model is somewhat different from the staff's model, I continue to

believe that monetary policy at its current level is accommodative and that, if this current stance

is sustained, the economy will experience faster inflation in the medium term. Clearly, we must

pay attention to the adverse effects of the financial disruptions. But we also must recognize that

our policy actions today and over the next several months will affect the outcomes of inflation
September 16, 2008                                                                         40 of 108



over the medium term. As I said, it is my view that the current stance of policy is inconsistent

with price stability in the intermediate term and so rates ultimately will have to rise.

       Now, I acknowledge that there are risks to economic growth going forward. The

slowdown and the financial market turmoil could turn out to be worse than I expect. I also

recognize that, given the events over the weekend, now is probably not the time to shock markets

by raising rates. But neither is it a time to panic and lower rates. A cut today may be reassuring

to some in the financial markets, but it also may serve to scare markets by sending a signal that

we are much more worried than perhaps they are. There is just way too much volatility and dust

blowing around to make such snap judgments on monetary policy. We have been aggressive

with our liquidity provisions, and we will continue to be so, and I support that. Stability coming

from monetary policy is an important attribute, and I think we have an opportunity to provide

some stability here. However, I am uncomfortable with the current Greenbook baseline path that

has the funds rate remaining unchanged well into the second half of next year. In my view, that

will not deliver an acceptable path of inflation outcome over the medium term. At the same

time, I do not perceive an immediate threat to the unanchoring of expectations, so I can accept

keeping the funds rate at an unchanged level at this meeting. But at some point, before the

unemployment rate begins to improve substantially, I believe this Committee will need to raise

rates in order to deliver on our inflation objectives.

       Regarding language, I can live with the language in alternative B. Thank you, Mr.

Chairman.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Stern.

       MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, even before the events of the last several

days, I thought that this was the most severe financial crisis, certainly, that I have seen in my
September 16, 2008                                                                            41 of 108



career. And the last several days--as well as some of Bill's comments about possible contagion

spreading from breaking the buck and so on and so forth--have only heightened that conviction

and my concern about where we are. So I think it is fair to say that the headwinds confronting

the economy have intensified even further. It is difficult to comment on the degree or the

duration, but I think we know the direction. As far as the near-term economic outlook is

concerned, I wasn't terribly optimistic about the next two or three quarters to begin with. If I

were going to prepare a new forecast at this point--or even had I prepared one last week--I

probably would mark it down a bit. But, of course, there is not much we can do about that at this

stage.

          As far as the inflation outlook is concerned, I have thought that, late in this year and into

next year, inflation would start to abate, and recent developments perhaps heighten my

conviction about that. But I will agree that it is still an open issue. So it seems to me that all of

this suggests that the outlook, at least in terms of financial conditions and the economy in the

near term, has clearly deteriorated. The inflation outlook, if anything, has perhaps improved a

notch, or at least the outlook that I had earlier is a little more solid.

          Given the lags in policy, it doesn't seem that there is a heck of a lot we can do about

current circumstances, and we have already tried to address the financial turmoil. So I would

favor alternative B as a policy matter. As far as language is concerned with regard to B, I would

be inclined to give more prominence to financial issues. I think you could do that maybe by

reversing the first two sentences in paragraph 2. You would have to change the transitions, of

course.

          I would say that if we wanted to change policy at this meeting--and that is not my

preference--I would do it by ½ percentage point, and I would think that the rationale would be
September 16, 2008                                                                           42 of 108



psychological reasons. Again, I don't think we are going to have a big effect on the near-term

performance of the economy. But if we think psychology in the marketplace is sufficiently bad

or that there is sufficient concern that the Federal Reserve somehow doesn't quite get it--I

would think that all our actions cumulatively, including the actions over the weekend, should not

make that a grave concern--then I think we would want to do more than ¼ percentage point.

Thank you.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans.

       MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The unfolding financial situation is injecting

enormous uncertainty into the economic outlook and policy picture. Although this analogy is

imperfect, today's uncertainty reminds me of March 2003. Then, on the eve of the invasion of Iraq,

the FOMC decided that geopolitical uncertainty was so great that the Committee could not

characterize the balance of risks at all in the policy statement. Today, the downside risks to output

are almost too dispersed to characterize. In one or two weeks, we may know better that either the

economy will somehow muddle through or we're likely to be facing the mother of all credit

crunches. I think that the first outcome would be quite an accomplishment under the circumstances,

but at the moment it's very hard to say how this will turn out.

       Nevertheless, we have to offer an opinion. With respect to the economic landscape before

the developments of last weekend, one thing that I kept hearing was that uncertainty and caution in

the business community had increased in recent weeks and that they were causing many firms to

hold back on spending and committing to financial investments. But a number of my contacts

indicated that the weakness was not out of line with their earlier expectations. On the plus side, I

got the impression that, with the exception of housing, there are not many excesses on the real side

of the economy that needed to be worked off. Notably, I did not hear of inventory overhangs or
September 16, 2008                                                                            43 of 108



unused capacity, and Manpower even indicated that their clients had been careful not to go

overboard earlier in the hiring cycle, and so we're not left with bloated workforces. Still, this

sentiment and the incoming data did not paint a pleasant picture with regard to the national outlook.

As one of my directors said, turning the common phrase against me, the economic problems that we

are facing appear to be remarkably resilient. Even before last weekend's events, the economic risks

had increased somewhat. We had the large rise in the unemployment rate, the recent weak

consumption data, and heightened caution by firms. Now, of course, the financial risks have

increased substantially and further threaten the growth outlook. At a minimum, credit standards are

likely to tighten further and crimp spending.

        I'm not looking forward to putting a forecast together in October. Dave and the Board staff

have my sympathy and respect for doing this each meeting. It's unfortunate, Dave, that we haven't

had the time to spend talking about the excellent special memo that you and your staff put together

on gauging the effective stance of policy. I thought that was very helpful. I had on previous

occasions mentioned that it would be nice to have some markers that we could look at, and at least

for me, that was quite helpful. Now, it's not a large stretch to expect that inflationary pressures will

recede, given what we're facing. We could see enough weakening in the economic outlook that the

projected slack in the economy will point inflation more clearly down and below 2 percent over the

medium term. Just last week I was still a bit skeptical that these forces would be large enough to

achieve this disinflation. But we need to be forward looking, and that would be how I would mark

my inflation forecast down today.

        So what does this mean for policy today? I favor alternative B. In my view, we've kept the

policy rate low so that we would not be far from appropriate policies if and when the risks to growth

intensified enough relative to the risks to inflation. So we are well positioned to act if we need to. I
September 16, 2008                                                                            44 of 108



agree with President Stern that, if we were to act, we should do something significant on the order

of 50 basis points. But I think we should be seen as making well-calculated moves with the funds

rate, and the current uncertainty is so large that I don't feel as though we have enough information

to make such calculations today. We will know much more in a couple of weeks, I hope at least

about the changes in underlying financial conditions, and will thus have a better sense of the risks to

both elements of the dual mandate and the associated policy actions. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Pianalto.

        MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The recent financial market news is shaking

people's confidence dramatically. But even before recent events, the evidence was already pointing

to more effects of the financial crisis on the real economy than I had built into my projection at our

last meeting. The reports from my District contacts and the incoming data caused me to revise

down my near-term output projection even before the latest round of financial market troubles. The

improvement in net exports that was reflected in the second-quarter GDP growth has not

encouraged manufacturers in my District to revise up their export projections. They are still holding

firmly to the opinion that the global economy is slowing and that export growth will slow with it for

several quarters. Of course, manufacturers are concerned about weakness spreading further within

their domestic customer base.

        The ongoing turmoil in financial markets continues to affect businesses in my District.

Some of the banks in my District are finding it very, very difficult to attract new capital and to

manage their way out of trouble. I am hearing that credit is harder to come by for many borrowers

who in the recent past would not have thought twice about their creditworthiness. Last week I met

with a business contact with a very long and successful track record of buying and operating private

companies. He reported that he had reached a deal with a bank to finance a project at a 7 percent
September 16, 2008                                                                            45 of 108



interest rate with the loan amortized over a fifteen-year term. On the morning of the close just three

days later, the bank faxed him the paperwork, which reflected a 12 percent interest rate on a non-

amortizing loan with a 10-year term. So the deal obviously is not going forward. One of my

directors, who heads a very large regional banking organization, reported at our board meeting last

week that many banks are shedding assets and that in some cases they are walking away from

longstanding customer relationships in order to do so. He said that investors are very skeptical

about putting new equity into banking deals and that those who have done so in the past vow not to

be burned twice, let alone a third time.

        Of course, inflation remains an important issue as well. My contacts, as Dave mentioned in

his report, are not so confident that a broad array of intermediate and retail prices are actually going

to move back down as a result of the recent decline in energy and other commodity prices. Several

of my contacts report that major suppliers are trying to maintain their prices despite the decline in

raw material costs just to make up for a long period of absorbing price increases. Nevertheless,

most of my contacts agree that the commodity price environment has stabilized considerably,

making me more confident that core inflation will gradually slow over the next couple of years.

        At our last meeting, my forecast was broadly consistent with the Greenbook baseline.

Today my forecasts for output and prices are broadly similar to the Greenbook's for 2009 and 2010,

although I am expecting more weakness in economic activity in the second half of this year than the

Greenbook is forecasting. My contacts in the manufacturing sector have persuaded me that exports

are going to be weaker in the short term than I had previously thought, and I have also revised down

my consumption path on the basis of the credit constraints on households. Although I am more

encouraged about the recent decline in energy and commodity prices, I would like to see further

evidence of price stability in these markets and also continued stability in inflation expectations for
September 16, 2008                                                                           46 of 108



a while longer before I reduce the upside risk that I place on my inflation outlook. However, a

growing risk to my outlook is that the short-term weakness that I have now built into my outlook

extends further out into the forecast period. I worry that my outlook doesn't fully capture all of the

many ways in which financial forces at work in the economy are actually going to restrain spending.

       On Friday, I was convinced that the best course of action was to keep an even keel in these

rough seas--to be flexible, of course, but to look beyond the latest wave crashing over the bow.

Only six weeks ago, inflation risks were on the verge of being unacceptable, and today the troubles

of Wall Street are the focus. I was sure that we were going to be in for many more surprises; I just

didn't know when and from where they would be coming. So I supported not only keeping our

policy unchanged but also keeping our language changes to a minimum even if that language

missed some nuances of the outlook. Given the events of the weekend, I still think it is appropriate

for us to keep our policy rate unchanged. I would like more time to assess how the recent events are

going to affect the real economy. I have a small preference for the assessment-of-risk language

under alternative A. I think it captures my concern that the downside risks have intensified.

However, I can support some of the comments and changes to highlight the financial market strains

that were made by President Lockhart and President Stern. So I can support the language under

alternative B with some additional comments about the financial strains that we are facing. Thank

you, Mr. Chairman.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker.

       MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll be brief. The Fifth District hasn't changed

much; it pretty well aligns with the national outlook. On the national outlook, I find myself, all

except for the policy path, aligned well with the staff. There have been a lot of economic reports

since the last meeting about particular categories of spending or particular sectors of the economy,
September 16, 2008                                                                             47 of 108



but they net out to only a small change, if any, in the broad contour of the outlook for me for overall

growth. I expect it to be sluggish for the remainder of the year with recovery beginning at some

point in the first half of next year. I'll commit the sin of saying that uncertainty is especially high

now. There seem to be reasonably plausible risks in the outlook in virtually every spending

category and, in many cases, on both sides of the outlook.

        About inflation, so far our credibility has helped to prevent a pickup in compensation

growth. In fact, it's heartening that compensation growth is coming in a little below expected in

response to the energy price shock this year. This has allowed us to accomplish the inevitable

decline in real wages without setting off an inflationary acceleration in wage rates. But we're still in

the midst of an upsurge in core inflation, which the Greenbook expects is going to tick up near

3 percent this quarter. As I said before, I think it's critically important for us to emerge from this

episode without trend inflation ratcheting upward, and I'm not sure we can take the forecasted

moderation for granted. Inflation compensation has been well contained, and that has been

heartening. But I have also said this before--I think the current level of five-year, five-year-

forward inflation compensation seems more consistent with a trend above 2½ percent than it does

with a 2 percent trend. So I'm not convinced that there's going to be much gravitational pull down

from an elevated rate once core rises. At the very least, I think there's some uncertainty about that.

        For financial markets, this is yet another historic week, as President Rosengren remarked. I

think the questions facing financial market participants, the uncertainty they face, can be usefully

partitioned into three broad categories. One is the aggregate magnitude of fundamental losses that

the financial sector faces. Another is the location of those losses--where they are going to pop up

within financial intermediary sectors. The third is the likelihood and the magnitude of fiscal

transfers in the form of governmental support for particular firms. I think the weekend's events
September 16, 2008                                                                               48 of 108



have caused financial market participants to revise their assessments of the future. It seems to me at

this early date in the process that the revision in the outlook has had more to do with the latter two

categories than with the aggregate size of fundamental losses we have coming down the pipeline.

That is to say, it's about where they're popping up, which firms are affected and are going to be hit,

and about the likelihood of government support.

        What we did with Lehman I obviously think is good. It has had an effect on market

participants' assessment of the likelihood of other firms getting support, and I think you would have

to attribute at least some of changes in equity prices to that. We're likely to see a lot more

disruption this week and in the days going forward than we've seen so far. I don't want to be

sanguine about it, but the silver lining to all the disruption that's ahead of us is that it will enhance

the credibility of any commitment that we make in the future to be willing to let an institution fail

and to risk such disruption again. On the other hand, if the disruption proves less severe than we

expect, the silver lining is that that will strengthen our hand in the future as well. However, I would

note that I don't think that what we did with Lehman has set a clear and firm boundary on the

circumstances under which government support is likely to be forthcoming. All the language

around not supporting Lehman was of a one-off nature. So I'm not sure about the extent to which

we've diminished uncertainty about the likelihood of support going forward, and I think that such

uncertainty is likely to exacerbate financial volatility in the months ahead until we can make more

progress on articulating a reasonably principled policy on when we're going to intervene and when

we're not, or at least enhancing clarity about that.

        Overall, I don't take what's happened in the last few days as changing much. It's not

obvious to me what the implications are for the outlook for inflation and growth, at least at this

point. So I don't see a reason to deflect from our policy path at this point. I can support standing
September 16, 2008                                                                            49 of 108



pat with the funds rate today. I think that's a good idea. I think, looking forward, that we will want

to raise rates sooner rather than later if core inflation doesn't moderate. I think we're more likely to

require a path more like the August Greenbook than the current one. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker, I have a question. I really would like your

advice on this. Historically, if we look at situations like Japan and Scandinavia, ultimately there

comes a point at which the banking system is decapitalized and dysfunctional and the government

intervenes on a large scale. Those interventions have been very expensive, but in those cases I

mentioned, they have generally restored the banking system to health and have helped the economy

recover. What's your view on the right sequencing? Do you think that we should remain very

tough until such time as it becomes inevitable that fiscal intervention is needed? Do you think that

we should avoid fiscal intervention at all stages? I'm seriously interested in knowing what you, or

anyone else who would like to comment, think is the appropriate stage, if any, at which fiscal

intervention becomes necessary.

        MR. LACKER. We have a legislated program of fiscal intervention--deposit insurance--

and the boundaries around that are very clear. Which liabilities are insured and which ones are not

are very clear. Around the edges there's some lack of clarity about what least-cost resolution means

and the extent to which deviations from that can be verified, and that provides some room for the

Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to deviate from that and implicitly to forbear to some extent.

But even that is sort of a well-contained and well-defined government support. That's what the

Congress has enacted, and it's not clear to me whether we should go beyond that. Japan got down

to deposit insurance. Scandinavia did, too. That seems like a natural benchmark.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. But I think this is a historical fact--that, once the banks

became decapitalized, there were also capital injections into the banks in both of those cases.
September 16, 2008                                                                            50 of 108



        MR. LACKER. Sure. Those were fiscal actions.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Right.

        MR. LACKER. And the FDIC does exactly that when it resolves a failed institution.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig.

        MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I have thought about this considerably because I think we

have come to a time in our history when we have institutions that clearly ought to be and may in

fact be too big to fail. I think we tend to react ad hoc during the crisis, and we have no choice at this

point. But as you look at the situation, we ought, instead of having a decade of denying too big to

fail, to acknowledge it and have a receivership and intervention program that extends some of the

concepts of the FDIC but goes beyond that. That is, if you are insolvent, it is not a central bank

issue--we are a liquidity provider--and therefore the government comes in. But unlike the GSEs,

everyone has to take some hit--the equity holders, certainly the preferred stockholders, also the

subordinated-debt holders, and perhaps the senior ones--by assuming a certain amount of loss.

They would have immediate access to--pick a number--80 percent. The research would help us

pick that number, and they can have access, but the rest becomes a subordinate-subordinate position

after the liquidation so that you have still a sense of market discipline in play and you don't get the

system gaming it in that, if you know there's a bailout coming, you buy the debt and sell the equity

short to make a bundle. I think therein lie the distortions that are absolutely detrimental to the long-

run health of the economy.

        Regarding how we go forward, I think we are going to have many lessons from this. Part of

the problem has been very lax lending and, obviously now, weaknesses in some of the oversight.

Also a history of our reacting from a monetary policy point of view to ease quickly to try to take

care of the problem and, therefore, to create a sense in the market of our support has raised some
September 16, 2008                                                                           51 of 108



real moral hazard issues that we now need to begin to remedy as we look forward in dealing with

future receiverships. We are in a world of too big to fail, and as things have become more

concentrated in this episode, it will become even more so.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I certainly agree--and the Treasury Secretary and I have said

publicly--that we need a strong, well-defined, ex ante, clear regime. But we have the problem now

that we don't have such a regime, and we're dealing on a daily basis with these very severe

consequences. So it is a difficult problem.

        MR. HOENIG. I think what we did with Lehman was the right thing because we did have a

market beginning to play the Treasury and us, and that has some pretty negative consequences as

well, which we are now coming to grips with.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren.

        MR. ROSENGREN. I think it's too soon to know whether what we did with Lehman is

right. Given that the Treasury didn't want to put money in, what happened was that we had no

choice. But we took a calculated bet. If we have a run on the money market funds or if the

nongovernment tri-party repo market shuts down, that bet may not look nearly so good. I think we

did the right thing given the constraints that we had. I hope we get through this week. But I think

it's far from clear, and we were taking a bet, and I hope in the future we don't have to be in

situations where we're taking bets. It does highlight the need to look at the tri-party repo market,

look at the money market fund industry, and look at how they're financing. There are a lot of

lessons learned, but we shouldn't be in a position where we're betting the economy on one or two

institutions. That is the situation we were in last weekend. We had no choice. We did what we had

to do, but I hope we will find a way to not get into this position again.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. President Fisher.
September 16, 2008                                                                               52 of 108



        MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, it may surprise you that President Yellen and I agree,

[laughter] at least with the recommendation, as I do with the majority. I also agree firmly with

President Hoenig. David wanted to know a little more about Houston, so I will start out with that,

and then I'll quickly go to the policy matter.

        The storm devastated Galveston and Beaumont. Their combined population is 650,000.

The population of the greater Houston area is 6.5 million. The damage to Houston was moderate.

The overall effect on the Texas economy should be relatively mild. We still expect employment

growth this year of 1½ percent or so, plus or minus, even though the storm really hit hard an area

that accounts for 26 percent of our employment and 30 percent of our output. In terms of the

national impact, I think it's important to understand that the energy infrastructure took minor losses.

The short-term functioning of that infrastructure is hampered by power losses and water problems.

Gasoline prices have gone up because 3.9 million barrels a day, or roughly 22 percent of the U.S.

refining capacity, has been shut down. By the way, that affects the spot market--I think that's some

of the reason you've seen this weakness recently--and maybe the near-term futures market. If you

look at the gasoline price market, the gasoline price went up another 13 cents yesterday, but the near

futures market is down 19 cents. I think it reflects expectations that, once power is restored, the

refineries will come back on line about a week later. So we will likely have a temporary bump-up

in inflation due to the gas prices. But I think it is important to realize that this, unlike Katrina, didn't

shut down the Mississippi, and the effect on other commodity prices is likely not to be significant,

with one exception. If you look, you'll see that prices of soybeans and soybean oil have spiked

recently. Clearly, the weather has an impact, but I think that's more supply­demand imbalance--

something that I'm watching carefully.
September 16, 2008                                                                             53 of 108



        The silver lining, if there is a silver lining to human tragedy, is probably twofold. One is, if

you notice, that lumber prices are actually up this year, which is kind of odd in terms of lumber

trading. Of course, lumber producers are probably pretty happy with the devastation in our state.

Second, Mexican laborers will be very happy if we let them into the country because the Hispanics

build most of our buildings in the United States. But I would say that the storm should not have any

effect on nor should it alter our preferred policy direction, and I would like to talk about that very

quickly.

        I have been affected in my thinking about economic growth and inflation by what I'm

seeing overseas. I'm globally oriented. I do expect that we're going to have less impetus from

exports, which were significant in carrying our growth. Our numbers show that, and your numbers,

David, show that, and all of our conversations have revolved around that. We were surprised on the

upside by it. Now I think weakening economic growth elsewhere is likely to subdue that effect.

We have also had an appreciation of the dollar. Oil prices have declined. I dove deep in my

anecdotal explorations with the majors and also with all supply companies. For whatever it's worth,

they are convinced that OPEC now has $100 rather than $70 as their benchmark. Most of them

expect prices to slide down to somewhere in the $80 range. But over the longer term, whatever that

term may be, we're going to talk about $100-plus oil. Then, of course, many commodity prices are

off their peaks. They have retraced significantly--some entirely.

        That said, in my anecdotal interchanges, I am still hearing about the likelihood, as I think

President Pianalto mentioned, that people are seeking to preserve their margins. They've been

stung for many years, and I'll just give you one case because I think it tells us something. If you

talk to the CEO of Wal-Mart USA, what they are pricing to be on their shelf six to eight months

from now has an average price increase of 10 percent. Now, of course, you might have this
September 16, 2008                                                                           54 of 108



reversed as we go through time. My biggest disappointment, incidentally, was that the one bakery

that I've gone to for thirty years, Stein's Bakery in Dallas, Texas, the best maker of not only bagels

but also anything that has Crisco in it, [laughter] has just announced a price increase due to cost

pressures. But I do think we have a mitigation of inflation, and we also have a mitigation of the

impetus to economic growth.

        As to the current financial predicament, I want to go back to a comment I made a long time

ago. This is not the first for me. I like to tease President Stern about his maturity--I don't go back

to the Panic of 1890, but to Herstatt, 1974; New York City's failure, 1975; 1987; and what

happened in Japan. Incidentally, you see the same pictures repeated in every newspaper. It's

always the trader holding his head or looking up at the board. Now it's in color; it used to be black

and white. I think it comes from the same archive, and it is repeated throughout time. [Laughter]

        All of that reminds me--forgive me for quoting Bob Dylan--but money doesn't talk; it

swears. When you swear, you get emotional. If you blaspheme, you lose control. I think the main

thing we must do in this policy decision today is not to lose control, to show a steady hand. I would

recommend, Mr. Chairman, that we embrace unanimously--and I think it's important for us to be

unanimous at this moment--alternative B. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much. Coffee is ready. Why don't we take

about thirty minutes? I have a couple of calls to make. See you at about 11:20.

                                            [Coffee break]

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. If we're ready, we can reconvene. First Vice President

Cumming.

        MS. CUMMING. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In our forecast, we do show a downgrade in

real activity in the near term since the August meeting. Downside risks to the economy we see as
September 16, 2008                                                                             55 of 108



still very considerable, and I would probably say that they really have increased quite a bit. I'll say

a few more words about that. I'll also talk about the inflation front. We have long thought that

inflation in the medium term will moderate, and we've been taking some comfort from recent

developments that have been cited already.

        On the weaker economic outlook, we see the intensification of adverse growth coming from

many things mentioned already: the unemployment rate increase and the likelihood that consumer

spending is going to be negative. I would put great stress also on indications that world demand is

slowing abruptly, as Nathan mentioned. I think that all three of these things are occurring in an

environment in which we have massive correction, adjustment, structural change in autos, housing,

and financial intermediation. That adjustment is really interconnected--one has effects on the

others. As part of this--particularly in the financial sector, I would say--in our senior loan officer

survey we've seen indications that, even as rates in, say, the mortgage markets start to ease a bit,

nonprice terms may still be tightening. President Pianalto talked about other areas in which

borrowers are facing much tougher terms. As financial institutions feel their capital is

constrained--and there's plenty of evidence that balance sheets are constrained across much of the

financial sector--those kinds of nonprice rationing measures probably will become more evident.

Second, as we discussed earlier, we've seen that credit losses, which thus far have been largely

confined to the financial sector and increasingly their shareholders, run some risk of spilling over to

other kinds of investors, who to date really have not felt that impact, such as money market fund

investors, as mentioned earlier. In addition, the three big corrections that we have seen in autos,

housing, and financial intermediation are not limited to the United States. In particular, as you

know, several G-10 countries are facing very difficult situations in their housing markets, not much

different from us; and the financial intermediation adjustment is truly a global correction.
September 16, 2008                                                                           56 of 108



       On the inflation side, as I mentioned, we have acknowledged that we've seen elevated rates

of inflation. But the recent developments--as we've seen in inflation expectations discussed earlier,

in energy and other commodity prices, the unit labor cost developments that President Yellen

discussed, and the year-over-year changes in import prices--are all pointing in the direction of some

moderation of inflation and moderation of inflation expectations. In particular, we have looked at

inflation expectations as measured by financial markets and feel that the decline that we see in those

expectations cannot be explained simply by the drop in energy prices and technical factors but look

larger than that. We would attribute that to indications, again, that global demand is slowing.

       Coming into this meeting today, we favor alternative B. I would associate myself with the

comments of President Stern and President Evans, that if we were, in fact, going to make a move

today, it would be better to make a large move of 50 basis points. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn.

       MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think that, even before the recent intensification

of financial market turmoil, there were trends becoming increasingly evident over the summer, since

late June, that suggested that the economy was on a substantially slower path than it had been

before. Resource utilization was falling appreciably, and the expected downward path of inflation

in the future had much better odds of occurring. Indeed, I think that the expected weakness in the

economy and the financial markets are interacting. We have one of these feedback loops in play.

There has been a lot of concern not only in the United States but in other countries as well, as I

heard in Basel last weekend, about a spillover--that the problems were not confined to the

mortgage markets but were spilling into the loan books of the banks. That was related to the

weakening in economic activity and was tightening up credit conditions, which would, in turn,
September 16, 2008                                                                             57 of 108



further weaken economic activity. So this feedback loop was at work certainly in the United States

and was beginning to be felt a little more in other countries as well.

        Since late June we have come to know a couple of things a little better. One is that

consumption is not immune to soft labor markets, increases in energy prices, declining housing

wealth, and tighter borrowing conditions. Even if we can't parse out the effects of each of these

factors, consumption has weakened substantially. We have had three months in a row of declines in

the retail control component and very weak auto sales. Although recent declines in oil prices will

support disposable incomes and consumption, I think the other sources of restraint on households--

declining house prices and tighter credit conditions--are more likely to intensify than to abate in

coming quarters.

        Another thing we know is that businesses have not gotten ahead of their need to shed labor,

and they continue to trim staff in response to actual and expected weakness in demand. The decline

in employment shows no signs of abating. Initial claims are running more than 50,000 higher than

they were at the end of June, and they have remained elevated past the time that the introduction of

the temporary extended benefits should have been felt. The unemployment rate is already

¼ percentage point higher than anyone around this table predicted for the end of the year. The

household survey, along with national income statistics, could be signaling greater softness in

activity and higher output gaps than is evident in the GDP and spending data.

        Another thing we have learned, as Nathan emphasized, is that foreign economies have not

decoupled from the United States, and their prospects have been revised down substantially.

They're absorbing the effects of weaker U.S. domestic demand on their exports, and growing risk

aversion in financial markets is spreading abroad. The latter, the growing risk aversion, is

beginning to have, as Chris Cumming was noting, effects on a number of emerging-market
September 16, 2008                                                                              58 of 108



economies, where capital inflows show signs of abating or even reversing; and indicators of

financial stress have risen as a consequence of all this. Because of the stronger dollar, we will be

able to rely less on exports going forward than we did before.

        We never expected a rapid return to more normal financial market functioning, but the

adjustment in the financial sector now looks to be more severe and to take longer than we thought

before. Financial firms need to bolster profits to offset losses and track capital. They need to de-

lever by reducing debt relative to equity. They need to consolidate, and above all, they need to

protect themselves against the possibility of a run. All of this implies a prolonged period of very

cautious lending and a high cost of capital for borrowers relative to benchmark interest rates. If the

current severe financial situation persists, I think the flight to safety and liquidity could dry up credit

to a broad array of all but the very safest borrowers and reduce asset prices with feedbacks on

spending, and that feedback loop could intensify if these market conditions pertain. I think that's a

substantial downside risk to the growth outlook.

        Not all news affecting spending has been negative. Capital goods orders have held up. The

decline in interest rates and commodity prices that respond to the markdown in global growth will

help support domestic demand, and actions to stabilize the GSEs are helping the mortgage market.

Activity is more likely to stagnate than to decline. But I think that we can be more certain than we

were, say, at the end of June that the economy will move substantially away from our high

employment objective over the next several quarters and that the downside risks to that are larger.

        On the inflation side, incoming data have been disappointing, a little worse than anticipated,

perhaps suggesting greater pass-through. The rise in import prices at the beginning of the third

quarter was higher than anticipated. But we've also learned over the last couple of months that oil

and other commodity prices can go down as well as up. The drop in retail energy prices helped to
September 16, 2008                                                                                 59 of 108



reverse much of the run-up in inflation expectations at the household level and reduced inflation

compensation in financial markets at least over the next five years. Weaker economies, along with

lower commodity prices, are expected to reduce inflation in our trading partners, and that along with

the dollar should lower import price inflation. The broadest measures of labor compensation

available through the second quarter continue to suggest no upward pressure on the pace of

increases in nominal labor costs. Despite elevated headline inflation, surprisingly good growth of

productivity is holding down unit labor costs. Taking all of this together, I think that, despite the

incoming inflation data, we can have greater confidence in our forecast that inflation will decline

late this year and run much lower in the next few years than in the past year or so, though the risks

to that still lie on the upside until we actually see the decline in headline inflation persist.

        On policy, Mr. Chairman, I support alternative B, keeping the funds rate at 2 percent. I

think that, at least for now, is consistent with lower inflation and a slow return to full employment in

the future over time. We need to assess the effects of the financial turmoil. If asset price declines

accelerate and the tightening of financial conditions is large and likely to be sustained, I would be

open at some point in the future to a lowering of interest rates. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.

        MR. WARSH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me do three things. I'll talk first about a

modal forecast but probably give it short shrift; second, about financial market conditions; and third,

about policy. Working under the assumption that our modal forecast doesn't look quaint a week

from now, if the world were somehow to hew to a reasonably moderate view of how financial

market conditions work going forward, personally I'd be a bit more optimistic than the Greenbook

for the second half of '08. I think that the net export growth is likely to prove stickier than

embedded in that forecast in spite of a stronger dollar and weaker global demand. But as we get to
September 16, 2008                                                                              60 of 108



2009 and 2010, I would actually be less rosy than the Greenbook. I don't see real catalysts for the

economy to normalize and to approach trendlike growth. Key uncertainties around financial

markets, labor markets, and housing and, I think, broader macroeconomic uncertainties that I've

discussed before in terms of trade policy, tax policy, and regulatory policy, would make the creep-

back to potential slower than embedded in those forecasts.

        On the inflation front, I continue to be encouraged by the strength in the exchange value of

the dollar and the work that is doing for us on import price inflation. I'm encouraged by the move

down across a breadth of commodities--not just energy, metals, and food but really across the

entire basket--but I'm still not ready to relinquish my concerns on the inflation front.

        Let me turn now to financial market conditions. I have talked before about the financial

architecture. I guess what we can say today with more confidence than I've been able to say before

is that the dismemberment of the existing financial architecture has accelerated in the last few days

and weeks, and we will very quickly look at business models, and industry will find new business

models, we hope, to provide credit to the real economy. Financial markets have been testing

financial institutions with weaker capital structures, uncertain management teams, and unsustainable

business models. I think the question before us today that's hard to judge is whether financial

markets are now to the point at which they are acting indiscriminately, testing all financial

institutions regardless of capital structure or business model. I'd say that the evidence of the past

twenty-four or forty-eight hours is still unclear. I think we'll have a greater clarity several days

from now about whether markets are able to make the distinguishing judgments that we would

count on.

        Look at the CDS spreads for the two remaining independent broker-dealers, Goldman Sachs

and Morgan Stanley, which Bill referenced. Goldman Sachs's CDS moved up another 190 or so
September 16, 2008                                                                               61 of 108



this morning. They are up 340 in the last two days. Morgan Stanley's are up 690. I wouldn't want

to say whether those numbers are right or wrong. It may be that the business model is a failing

one--that is, wholesale funding is no longer practicable in the world that we're now in. If the

problems were confined to that part of the financial services industry, it would be tough and it

would be ugly and, if you were a resident of New York, particularly painful. But I don't think it

would rise to the level that would force us to recalibrate monetary policy. But if, in fact, those

losses end up being endemic to all financial institutions, even those with strong deposit bases and

higher capital ratios, then we certainly would have to take that into consideration. The few that are

trying to swim against this tide are flailing; and without extraordinary actions either by a consortium

of their competitors or by the official sector, they're likely to continue to fail. I think our efforts to

date to protect the broader financial markets and the economy from knock-on effects in particular

financial services sectors do seem to be helping to cushion the blow. But the prospect of some

meaningful discontinuity and of some systemic risk remains real, and it's hard for me to judge today

whether that prospect is as low as we might have thought even some weeks ago.

        Ultimately, the question for the real economy is whether the emergence of this new financial

architecture can come quickly enough to get credit markets to normalize. Is the suddenness of

events in the last week going to accelerate the move toward a new financial architecture? Will the

forces of creative destruction make that faster but ultimately bring credit back to these markets

sooner? Are these forces so strong and overwhelming that all financial institutions will be

hunkering down, clinging to an architecture that no longer works? That's a question to which I

don't know the answer.

        A couple of more points on markets. I think the work that was done over the past few days

on Lehman Brothers should make us feel good in one respect. Market functioning seems to be
September 16, 2008                                                                             62 of 108



working okay--by which I mean that the plumbing around their role in the tri-party repo business,

due in part to the Fed's actions, seems to be working. It's ugly. The backroom offices of these

places are going crazy. There's a lot of manual work being done. So they wouldn't give it high

marks. But it looks as though positions are being sorted out in a tough workmanlike way, and so

that's encouraging.

        Other than the CDS moves and the equity moves on the other broker-dealers, Goldman

Sachs and Morgan Stanley, I don't think that that is the real specter that's casting some question

over broader financial institutions. I think the Lehman situation, no matter what judgment we made

this past weekend about whether or not to provide official-sector money, is not what is driving

markets broadly outside of the investment banks. What's driving the broader uncertainty are

questions about institutions like AIG that were rated AAA, that were so strong that counterparties

didn't need collateral, and that were a certain bet to be a guarantor around stable value funds and all

sorts of other products. If in a matter of weeks that AAA rating and that security could turn out to

be worthless, then that would force institutions to evaluate two things. First, narrowly, how much

AIG exposure do I have? Second, more broadly, if that's AIG, what about the rest of the insurance

companies? What about the rest of the financial institutions, which aren't investment banks but are

really representing the foundations of the U.S. financial system? So it is both those direct and

indirect aspects that we have to try to understand as best we can. My own view is that the AIG

question would be more financial devastation if these institutions turn out to be meaningfully

insolvent but actually, in some ways, less market dislocation among intermediaries. That is,

Lehman Brothers, Merrill Lynch, and Bear Stearns are touching and are in the middle of many more

flows of data, and there are real losses being felt. But if an AAA company like AIG were really

fundamentally insolvent, the direct losses to a range of institutions, particularly those that are not
September 16, 2008                                                                             63 of 108



just wholesale institutions but are retail institutions, could be very significant. I don't think we

know the answer yet to the question of whether AIG speaks to a broader loss of confidence that

could affect the foundations of the U.S. financial system.

        Let me turn finally to policy, Mr. Chairman. I support alternative B and, based on some of

the discussion from Presidents Lockhart and Stern, I'd make some simple suggestions that may

strike a balance that acknowledges the concerns we have about financial markets but doesn't put us

in the position where we are inclined to lurch in one direction, which as some people suggested

could create more uncertainty than we intend. My suggestion, Mr. Chairman, would be to take the

first sentence from alternative A, paragraph 2--"strains in financial markets have increased

significantly and labor markets have weakened further"--and make that the first sentence of

alternative B. Then strike the second sentence of alternative B, because I think we've largely

covered that. That order gives proper attention, it strikes me, to the financial market developments.

Finally, in the assessment of risk, Mr. Chairman, if you look at the last sentence, I would suggest

modifying that ever so slightly by inserting the word "closely" and making one other modification.

So that last sentence would read, "The Committee will continue to monitor economic and financial

developments closely and will act as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and price

stability." Also, if you think it's acceptable, rather than saying "financial developments" maybe

there we would say, "The Committee will continue to monitor economic and financial market

developments closely." Those would be my suggestions to try to strike that balance--that we are

keenly focused on what's going on, but until we have a better view of its implications, we are not

going to act. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kroszner.
September 16, 2008                                                                             64 of 108



        MR. KROSZNER. Thank you very much. Since the last meeting, there have obviously

been a number of flare-ups in the fires that have been burning in the financial markets--the GSEs

and then certainly what's come this past weekend and what's likely to come over this week and into

the future. A number of people have mentioned things ranging from AIG to pressures on money

market funds to some large financial institutions. There are some very large regional banks and a

very large thrift that will be facing a lot of challenges as the uncertainties in the markets continue. I

won't repeat what Governor Kohn said about the continuing pressures on the bank balance sheets. I

think it is important to take into account that those pressures will be there going forward not only on

U.S. institutions but also increasingly on international institutions. No one has mentioned UBS yet,

but that's another institution about which there's a lot of concern, and if you look at CDS quotes

there, they are skyrocketing also. Much as Governor Warsh said, I think that people are worried

about what the next shoe to drop will be and whom we have to challenge. Whom do we have to get

more information about to make us feel comfortable? If that suddenly becomes everyone, then of

course the markets don't function.

        I just want to focus quickly on consumption and consumer credit markets and then on

inflation, and then I'll conclude. We have made some references to how consumers have acted in

the past and whether they will continue to act this way. In some sense the consumer has been on a

marathon since the early 2000s, facing an incredible amount of shocks--a lot of contraction in

2001, significant declines in stock market wealth, September 11, corporate governance scandals,

sustained job losses, and low real income growth. Nonetheless, the consumer continued to

consume. But now the consumer seems to be flagging. We have perhaps a very modest effect of

the stimulus, which obviously can lead to negative payback for the rest of the year--so a drag going

forward as well as drags from housing and stock market wealth, continuing job losses, rising
September 16, 2008                                                                             65 of 108



unemployment, and pressures on income. Although many of these shocks were similar to ones that

happened earlier in the decade, it seems that consumers do not have the same resilience now that

they did at one point. It's not surprising that, after having run this marathon, they're going to be a

bit tired.

         Part of it could also be the credit conditions that are putting much more pressure on them.

Just to give you an anecdotal report, but it's from one of the largest providers of consumer credit in

the economy. After stabilization basically through our FOMC meeting in August, we've seen some

significant deterioration in delinquencies and in the performance of those who get into

delinquencies--they roll right to full chargeoff much more rapidly. So we have seen not exactly a

qualitative change but a significant deterioration. Also, the ability to securitize credit cards has

changed dramatically. After our having opened the window and the markets having opened up in

the second quarter, they basically haven't been able to do anything in the third quarter, and that's

before this weekend. Obviously that's not going to be helping them.

         Of course, there are some offsetting factors that can help the consumer. The very significant

decline in mortgage rates has led to quite a response, according to this very large provider of

consumer credit in the United States. The number of applications for mortgages, particularly for

refis, has doubled over the last couple of weeks. So people do respond to prices, and that can help

to ease some of their income burdens. Obviously, the reduction in energy prices and many food

prices is helpful on that.

         But of course, what has been good news for U.S. consumers may not be good news for

international consumers. As a lot of people have mentioned, the rest of the world is seeing a very

significant slowdown. I think the elevated commodity prices had helped to mask a lot of the

underlying fiscal and structural problems in these economies, actually much like rising housing
September 16, 2008                                                                           66 of 108



prices in the United States had masked the problems in underwriting standards and what was going

on in the mortgage market. So I think there are going to be significant challenges in a lot of

countries around the world. The boost that we had earlier this year from the international sector is

something we can't rely on.

        On inflation, we're heartened by some of the lower energy prices. But I want to relate one

anecdote. In a meeting at the OECD, the CEO of one of the largest private oil producers in the

world was asked what reference price he used because obviously he has to make tens of billions of

dollars of decisions on investment and so they thought here's someone who would really have a

good notion of what the price of oil would be going forward. Without hesitation the person

responded, "$100, plus or minus $50." [Laughter] That kind of uncertainty from someone who is

really in the markets and making those kinds of decisions shows us that we have a reasonable

degree of uncertainty in inflation pressures going forward. That said, I think the Greenbook forecast

is where I would be also, although we're at uncomfortably elevated levels now. There are a lot of

reasons to believe that, although they may be even a bit more elevated in the coming quarter, there

are likely forces to bring things back down. This is particularly credible in the context of both

survey-based and market-based expectations being quite contained, the market-based expectations

being at the low of the year or even over the last couple of years.

        So this brings me to support alternative B for no change today. On the statement, I do

believe that some greater recognition of the stress would be valuable. I think it would be valuable to

have something in the first sentence of paragraph 2 that focuses on the strains--perhaps just a single

sentence about the strains--and then we can put the other pieces on consumption and housing into

the next sentence. It is important in the final paragraph to leave our options open if we do see

significant negative feedback effects so that we can make a move that wouldn't be a shock to the
September 16, 2008                                                                            67 of 108



markets but it also wouldn't be something that the markets could bank on. Thank you, Mr.

Chairman.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke.

        MS. DUKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I continue to focus on the traditional commercial

bank structure. I looked at two large retail banks, three regional banks, and three community banks,

and two things came out of this. First, capital is driving everything, and the amount of capital that

the banks need is now being driven more by the analysts and the rating agencies than it is anything

that the regulators are doing. The banks feel as though they have done everything they can do in

terms of capital management. They've quit buying back stock. They've cut their dividends.

They've reduced expenses. There is no more capital available in external markets--not common

stock, not preferred, not anything. One bank did issue some preferred stock through its own

networks and a common stock issue--interestingly sort of snuck it into the market. They dribbled it

out in small amounts because they found that, as soon as the markets determined that they were

going to need to issue capital, they started to short the stock, figuring they could buy it back. So

they did almost a reverse stock buyback.

        The markets are fragile to dead. So what are they going to do? The only thing they can do

is contract the balance sheet and not lend. Before I get to that, there was again discussion in several

of the conversations about naked short selling. One bank reportedly had 103 percent of total

outstandings in short interest, and that seemed odd to me. So I went and checked it this morning,

and it turns out that it was not 103 percent. It was only 93 percent. But if you subtract out the stock

that was owned by the officers and the directors, then it was over 100 percent. Another bank said

that the rules in the disclosure that surround long positions have to be replicated somehow in short
September 16, 2008                                                                                68 of 108



positions because they're having just as much control over what happens in the fate and the

management of the firm.

        So what are they doing in terms of credit? Any heavy uses of credit or predominant uses of

credit are just not being done. This eliminates all commercial real estate. They're actively trying to

move that off their books. Participation loans, in which the participants get only the credit piece, are

drying up. Those aren't available. No bank has any interest in going back into residential

construction lending. One large bank said they were approving only one-third of the consumer

credit that they would have approved a year ago. The secondary market for jumbos for takeouts on

commercial are nonexistent, and one bank told me that, with the current cost of capital and cost of

funding, the breakeven spread for a loan was 400 basis points over LIBOR. That's the new lending

market, and I don't see it getting any better until some capital is available.

        The credit quality side is actually a better story. First, except for residential real estate, it's

really still pretty good. C&I lending is holding up extremely well. In commercial real estate, again,

outside of residential development, things are really looking pretty good. Some small retail centers

are showing softness with the small storefronts; and in areas like Michigan, they're worried about

losing the anchor tenants. Other than that, everything is okay. The other consumer credit feels like

a mild recession but, again, is normally cyclical. Home equity is awful. The bank-originated loans

range from good--one institution had 39,000 loans with 44 past due--to performing similar to

unsecured credit. The broker-originated loans, especially the later vintages, are 100 percent loss.

Within the mortgages, the rate of acceleration in new past-dues has slowed down. About rejections,

I asked them to project when the new delinquencies would be offset by the resolution of existing

delinquencies, and they said somewhere between year-end 2008 and mid-2009. So we are moving

through that process. The severity, however, continues to grow as housing prices decline. It does
September 16, 2008                                                                            69 of 108



appear that the portfolio lenders are getting their arms around the collection and the loss-mitigation

effort. They're assigning resources, accountability, and priority. It looks as though they are finally

set up to do a pretty good job on that, managing it on several fronts--the analysis of the issue, the

early stage collection, contact, and loss mitigation--and actually assigning a permitted spend, if you

will, to resolve the loan. Foreclosures are going to take a lot longer and are particularly affected by

state law. Apparently in Florida it takes a year to get a property in foreclosure. So those

foreclosures are going to happen over a fairly long period of time.

        I asked about a bottom, and they said they do feel as though they're seeing bottoms in some

markets--Ohio and coastal areas in California, although not inland. Las Vegas and Atlanta are

overbuilding, but the in-migration will absorb it. Florida is a bottomless hole--speculation

combined with insurance problems. In Arizona so much land was available that they can't find a

bottom there. Regarding lot inventory, a community banker in Omaha said they had seven years of

inventory in terms of lots, which I thought was pretty startling until I read in the American Banker

the same story in Atlanta and the same story in Orlando. So I think when residential development

does resume, it will be to work out the lot inventory. Also, the phantom inventory is at least as large

as the current inventory--phantom inventory being defined as people who want to sell but don't

want to sell in the current market. Asked to compare current credit metrics with those in the 1980s

and 1990s, one contact said they peaked in 1988 at 5.8 percent nonperforming. Now they are at

1.66. I found a chart, and for the entire industry, nonperformers were 4 percent in 1991. They're

1.2 percent right now. So the credit metrics are just nowhere near what they were in the S&L crisis

for the industry.

        I came out of that really believing that, if we are going to do something, we need to address

the availability of capital to commercial banks but we should leave the bad loans in the banks
September 16, 2008                                                                           70 of 108



because they're getting to the point where the portfolio lenders are doing a good job of working

through these loans. To try to take them out and put them into another structure, we would just have

to replicate that whole gearing-up process. I don't necessarily think that's the case with the

servicers, particularly the servicers of private-label mortgages. That's something on which I know

we've done some research here, and I want to investigate that a bit more to see if there's something

to be known there.

       In terms of the policy, I, too, would favor alternative B with some change in the language to

paragraph 2. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much, and thanks, everyone, for very

helpful comments. Let me try to summarize, and I will just make some comments, and then we

can turn to the statement and policy.

       The group indicated, of course, that economic growth has slowed and looks to be quite

sluggish in the second half. I didn't hear a great deal of change in the general profile, with most

people still viewing growth as being slow in the near term but perhaps recovering somewhat in

2009. But obviously there is a lot of uncertainty surrounding that judgment. The ongoing

problems in housing and the financial system are, of course, the downside risks to growth.

Another factor, which is becoming more relevant, is the slowing global economy, which together

with the stronger dollar may mean that U.S. export growth will be somewhat less. Despite the

tax rebate, consumer spending seems likely to be weak in the near term, reflecting a variety of

factors that we noted before, including housing and equity wealth, credit conditions, and

particularly perhaps the ongoing weakness in the labor market. The labor market is

deteriorating, with unemployment up, although UI programs may play some role in the

unemployment rate. It is somewhat difficult to predict the peak of the unemployment rate, given
September 16, 2008                                                                               71 of 108



the upward momentum we are seeing. Declines in energy prices, however, will improve real

incomes and help consumer sentiment--so that is a potentially positive factor.

        The housing sector continues to be the central concern in the economy, in both the real

and the financial sides. There are no clear signs of stabilization, although obviously regional

conditions vary considerably. The government action regarding the GSEs has lowered mortgage

rates and may be of some assistance. Credit conditions have tightened, though, in other areas as

well, including nonresidential construction.

        Firms are continuing to struggle with weaker demand, higher uncertainty, and high costs.

Manufacturing has been relatively stable to weaker, but we had at least one report of a survey

that in the medium term the outlook is looking a little better. Inventories appear to be relatively

well managed. Credit conditions for business vary, but there are indications that some firms are

finding it very difficult to attract capital.

        Financial markets received a lot of attention around the table. Conditions clearly have

worsened recently, despite the rescue of the GSEs, the latest stressor being the bankruptcy of

Lehman Brothers and other factors such as AIG. Almost all major financial institutions are

facing significant stress, particularly difficulties in raising capital, and credit quality is

problematic, particularly in residential-related areas. One member noted that it is not evident

that markets are clearly differentiating between weaker and stronger firms at this point.

Deleveraging is continuing, and securitization markets are moribund. Credit terms and

conditions are quite tight and may be a significant drag on the economy. However, the medium-

term implications of the recent increases in financial stress for the economy are difficult to

assess. We may have to wait for some time to get greater clarity on the implications of the last

week or so.
September 16, 2008                                                                          72 of 108



       On the inflation front, recent core and headline numbers have been high, reflecting earlier

increases in the prices of energy and raw materials. There are positive factors, including the

significant intermeeting declines in the prices of oil and other commodities, which, if maintained,

would bring headline inflation down rather notably by the end of the year or next year. The

dollar has also strengthened. Generally speaking, inflation expectations, though noisy, have

improved. We have seen a decline in TIPS breakevens and some decline in survey expectations

as well. But it was noted that the five-by-five TIPS breakeven remains above a level consistent

with long-term price stability. Nominal wage growth has remained subdued so far, slack is

increasing, productivity has been strong, and therefore, unit labor costs are well controlled.

Again, all of these factors are positive in terms of a better inflation picture going forward. On

the other hand, recent declines notwithstanding, the cumulative increases in commodity prices

over the past year or so do remain large, and there is some evidence that these cost increases are

being passed through into core prices. Commodity prices are extremely volatile, which makes

inflation very difficult to forecast and makes the inflation outlook, therefore, quite uncertain.

Wages could also begin to rise more quickly as the economy strengthens. For all these reasons,

inflation risks are still in play and remain a concern for the Committee. Some participants

reiterated their concern that maintaining rates too low for too long risks compromising our

credibility and stimulating inflation over the medium run. That is a very quick survey of the

comments. Are there any comments or questions?

       If not, let me just make a few comments. Personally, I see the prospects for economic

growth in the foreseeable future as quite weak, notwithstanding the second quarter's strength. I

think what we saw in the recent labor reports removes any real doubt that we are in a period that

will be designated as an official NBER recession. Unemployment rose 1.1 percentage points in
September 16, 2008                                                                         73 of 108



four months, which is a relatively rapid rate of increase. The significance of that for our

deliberations is, again, that there does seem to be some evidence that, in recession regimes, the

dynamics are somewhat more powerful and we tend to see more negative and correlated

innovations in spending equations. So I think that we are in for a period of quite slow growth.

That is confirmed by what we are seeing in consumption, which probably would be quite

negative if it weren't for the remainder of the fiscal stimulus package. Other components of

demand are, likewise, quite weak. We are all familiar with the housing situation. Some other

factors that were supportive in Q2 are weakening--a number of people have noted the export

growth. Actually, it is net exports--which is important--not just exports, and we are seeing both

slowing growth in exports and some forecast of increased growth in imports.

       A factor that we haven't talked about much is the fiscal side. That has been supportive

and may be less supportive going forward. Generally speaking, though, I do think--and I have

said this for a long time--that the credit effects will be important. They operate with a lag. It is

very difficult to judge the lag. But my strong sense is that they are still some distance from their

peak; that they will begin to be felt outside of housing, in nonresidential construction, for

example, in consumer spending, and in investment; and that this is going to be independent of

last week's financial developments. I think that is going to be a major drag, probably well into

next year.

       There are a few positives, which give some hope of some improvement next year. We

have talked about energy and commodity prices as they relate to inflation, but of course, the

decline in energy and commodity prices is also a plus for consumers and raises real incomes and

would be supportive of sentiment, as we have already seen. There are a few positive indications

here and there on the housing market, a few glimmers of stability, particularly in some regions. I
September 16, 2008                                                                          74 of 108



think that the GSE stabilization is going to be very important. It has already lowered mortgage

rates. It suggests that there will be a market for securitized mortgages, and I think that is

positive. So if I wanted to outline an optimistic scenario, it would involve stronger indications of

stabilization in housing, which in turn would feed into more confidence in the financial sector

and would lead over time to improvement in the broader economy.

       I do think that financial conditions are a major concern. The situation right now is very

uncertain, and we are not by any means away from significant systemic risk. Even if we avoid a

major systemic event, the increase in risk aversion, the pullback from all counterparties, the

deleveraging, the sale of assets--all of these things are going to continue for some time and are

going to make the financial sector very stressed, which obviously will have effects on the

economy.

       I have been grappling with the question I raised for President Lacker, and I would be very

interested in hearing other views either now or some other time. The ideal way to deal with

moral hazard is to have in place before the crisis begins a well-developed structure that gives

clear indications in what circumstances and on what terms the government will intervene with

respect to a systemically important institution. We have found ourselves, though, in this episode

in a situation in which events are happening quickly, and we don't have those things in place.

We don't have a set of criteria, we don't have fiscal backstops, and we don't have clear

congressional intent. So in each event, in each instance, even though there is this sort of

unavoidable ad hoc character to it, we are trying to make a judgment about the costs--from a

fiscal perspective, from a moral hazard perspective, and so on--of taking action versus the real

possibility in some cases that you might have very severe consequences for the financial system

and, therefore, for the economy of not taking action. Frankly, I am decidedly confused and very
September 16, 2008                                                                           75 of 108



muddled about this. I think it is very difficult to make strong, bright lines given that we don't

have a structure that has been well communicated and well established for how to deal with these

conditions. I do think there is some chance--it is not yet large, but still some chance--that we

will in fact see a much bigger intervention at the fiscal level. One is tempted to argue that by

doing more earlier you can avoid even more later, but of course that is all contingent and

uncertain. So we will collectively do our best to deal with these very stressful financial

conditions, which I don't think will be calm for some time.

        With respect to inflation, I accept the many caveats around the table. I have to say that I

think, on net, inflation pressures are less worrisome now. The last two meetings have been very

positive in that respect. The declines in energy and commodity prices are quite substantial.

Natural gas, for example, has reversed all of its gains of the year. Steel scrap is down 40 percent

in two months. We are seeing many other indications that commodity prices really have come

down quite a bit. The dollar's increase is also quite striking, and we have talked about wages,

TIPS, and other factors. So I think overall I see at least the near-term inflation risk as

considerably reduced. I do agree, though, with the points that were made that we may well see

pressure on core inflation for a while longer, despite this morning's reasonably benign number.

The increases in commodity costs, although they have been partially reversed, have not been

entirely reversed. Certainly over the last year to year and a half there is still a net substantial

increase, which will show up as firms begin to pass through those costs.

        It is also the case, of course, that we have seen a very, very sharp movement in

commodity prices and the dollar. Therefore, there is no logical reason why that couldn't be

reversed. Clearly, one problem we face is that the uncertainty about forecasting commodity

prices is so large that it makes our forecasting exercises extraordinarily uncertain and means that
September 16, 2008                                                                           76 of 108



we need to be somewhat more careful than we otherwise would be if we were back in the days of

the Texas Railroad Commission, when we knew the price of oil six months in advance. We

don't have that privilege anymore. So I think core inflation may be elevated for a while. It may

take a while for inflation to moderate. Everything I say is contingent on the dollar and

commodity trends not being strongly reversed. But if those things are not reversed, I think we

will see some improvement in inflation in the near term.

           I also agree with those who say that, when the time comes, we do need to be prompt at

removing accommodation. It is just as much a mistake to move too late and allow inflation, and

perhaps even financial imbalances, to grow as it is to move too early and be premature in terms

of assuming a recovery. I think that is a very difficult challenge for us going forward, and I

acknowledge the importance of that, which a number of people have noted.

           So that is a quick summary of my views. Let me just turn briefly, then, to policy. Do we

have the statement? Let me just preview. I talked with Governor Warsh, and he gave me now

during the break some of those suggestions he made. As they fit closely with other things that

people said around the table, we have made a version here that incorporates them. I'll discuss

that in just a minute. 3

           First, as a number of people have said, let me just say that I thought the memo that the

staff prepared over the intermeeting period was extraordinarily helpful. We have been debating

around the table for quite a while what the right indicator of monetary policy is. Is it the federal

funds rate? Is it some measure of financial stress? Or what is it? I think the only answer is that

the right measure is contingent on a model. As President Lacker and President Plosser pointed

out, you have to have a model and a forecasting mechanism to think about where the interest rate

is that best achieves your objectives. It was a very useful exercise to find out, at least to some
3
    The statement referred to here is appended to this transcript (appendix 3).
September 16, 2008                                                                         77 of 108



extent, how the decline in the funds rate that we have put into place is motivated. In particular,

the financial conditions do appear to be important both directly and indirectly--directly via the

spreads and other observables that were put into the model and indirectly in terms of negative

residuals in spending equations and the like. The recession dynamics were also a big part of the

story. I hope that what this memo does for us--again, I think it's extraordinarily helpful--is to

focus our debate better. As President Plosser pointed out, we really shouldn't argue about the

level of the funds rate or the level of the spreads. We should think about the forecast and

whether our policy path is consistent with achieving our objectives over the forecast period. I

am sympathetic to the general view taken by the staff, which argues that those recession

dynamics and financial restraints are important, that we are looking at slow growth going

forward, and that inflation is likely to moderate. Based on those assumptions, I think that our

policy is looking actually pretty good. To my mind, our quick move early this year, which was

obviously very controversial and uncertain, was appropriate. Their analysis also suggests that

the amount of insurance that we have is perhaps limited, given that they take a risk-neutral kind

of modeling approach. Having said that, I think they have also clearly set out the conditions and

the framework in which we can debate going forward exactly where we should be going. To the

extent that those around the table disagree with the model or with the projection, then that is the

appropriate way, it seems to me, to address our policy situation. So, again, I do very much

appreciate that. It helped me think about the policy situation. As I said, I think our aggressive

approach earlier in the year is looking pretty good, particularly as inflation pressures have

seemed to moderate.

       Overall I believe that our current funds rate setting is appropriate, and I don't really see

any reason to change. On the one hand, I think it would be inappropriate to increase rates at this
September 16, 2008                                                                          78 of 108



point. It is simply premature. We don't have enough information. There is not enough pressure

on inflation at this juncture to do that. On the other hand, cutting rates would be a very big step

that would send a very strong signal about our views on the economy and about our intentions

going forward, and I think we should view that step as a very discrete thing rather than as a 25

basis point kind of thing. We should be very certain about that change before we undertake it

because I would be concerned, for example, about the implications for the dollar, commodity

prices, and the like. So it is a step we should take only if we are very confident that that is the

direction in which we want to go.

       Therefore my recommendation to the Committee--and I will open it up for comment in a

moment--is to keep the funds rate at its current level. I listened very carefully to the

conversation around the table in terms of the statement. I think it was President Lockhart,

President Stern, and Governor Warsh, among others, who talked about strengthening the

language on financial markets. So the draft statement that you have in front of you is an attempt

to make that change. It has two changes relative to existing alternative B. First, as Governor

Warsh suggested, it reverses the first two sentences and so focuses in the first sentence on

"Strains in financial markets have increased significantly and labor markets have weakened

further," and then the rest of it is basically the same as it was. The other change, which is in the

last paragraph in the risk assessment, is pretty small, but it is probably worth considering. The

word "closely" has been added to suggest, obviously, that we understand that the situation is

changing rapidly and that we are carefully following conditions as they evolve. Kevin, we took

your word "market" there--what was the rationale for it?

       MR. WARSH. My sense is--and this is certainly open for discussion--that we want the

focus to be that we are really watching market developments closely. We are not trying to
September 16, 2008                                                                       79 of 108



monitor the broader economy, which we might not be able to measure too much. I will admit

that we have "economic and financial markets," with "closely" modifying both of them, but the

idea was to put the focus on the market side to a slightly greater extent than we normally do.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. So I think that's useful, although I do note that, all

else being equal, there's a slight barrier for making any change, and that one word is a change.

President Fisher.

       MR. FISHER. I am sort of indifferent about this, but I don't want to forget what

Governor Duke was talking about. It's not just financial markets; it's financial developments.

We are also talking about the internal dynamics of what is happening in the banking system and

the credit contraction you spoke of. So we lead off with financial markets. I don't want people

to think we are focusing only on markets--Governor Warsh, I would disagree on that point. It's

a minor disagreement, but I think it is overkill.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. Let me open it up for any other comments on the

statement or the policy action. President Evans.

       MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is really just a question. What type of

reaction do we think will be engendered by inserting "closely"? Everybody understands that we

monitor financial developments very carefully. So we are bringing attention to this. Will there

be a presumption that we are likely to do something intermeeting or something like that? I am

not saying that is wrong, but it is a question.

       MR. DUDLEY. I would say that the markets will take it as a statement that is

conditional on what happens in markets. If markets get sufficiently bad, if there is some

threshold of deterioration, that can potentially provoke an intermeeting move is the way I think

they would take it. Brian, would you agree with that?
September 16, 2008                                                                        80 of 108



        MR. MADIGAN. I agree. The fact that the first sentence of the risk assessment has a

parallel treatment of the upside and downside risks may communicate a bit the sense that you are

not ready to ease immediately.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. We will decide. We will take a vote on it, if

necessary. President Lacker.

        MR. LACKER. Yes. I echo President Evans's concern. My recollection is--and I

haven't consulted the record recently--under your predecessor there was some phrasing like

"watch market developments closely" that came to be widely understood as a signal of an

intermeeting move.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I think it was "monitor closely." Is that what it was?

        MR. LACKER. "Monitor closely" or some language like that.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, "monitor closely." Maybe you're right.

        MR. LACKER. Yes, and that gives me pause. Then, about "market"--like a lot of

economists, I am willing to construe the word "market" very broadly to include intermediation

mechanisms of all types and the market for commercial credit in, you know, Dillon, South

Carolina. [Laughter] But I am not sure that market participants are going to take it that broadly.

They are going to take it in the sense of markets in traded financial instruments and organized

exchanges and such. I just wonder if they are going to interpret it too closely as Wall Street.

        CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. So the sentiment over here on this side is that

nobody thinks "market" is important. Let's get rid of "market." We'll discuss "closely."

President Plosser.

        MR. PLOSSER. I think "market" may be construed too narrowly. We don't really mean

it that way, I don't think.
September 16, 2008                                                                           81 of 108



       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. "Market" is already gone. All right. Other comments,

suggestions, or thoughts? Governor Kroszner.

       MR. KROSZNER. But I do think it is the delta, so it is the change. By including

"closely," I think the markets are going to look very closely at that change, and they are going to

think that we are clearly trying to convey something with that. I just think we have to make sure

that we feel comfortable in doing so. Certainly some people have suggested that they would be

happy to move 50 basis points if they saw the markets moving, but I do think that that one

particular word will get a lot of attention. Not that it should, but I think it is going to be focused

on. Just as at one point we used the word "yet," and that got an enormous amount of attention.

And this has two syllables. [Laughter]

       MR. FISHER. Unless you are from the south. [Laughter]

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The sad thing is that Governor Kroszner is right. We have

seventeen people debating over this word, and it actually does matter. Does anyone else want to

weigh in? Okay. I think my sense is that there should be a barrier, a bit of a hurdle, to changing;

so I am leaning toward sticking with what we have. Would that be okay, Governor Warsh, do

you think?

       MR. WARSH. On "closely"?

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Getting rid of "closely."

       MR. WARSH. Let me ask Brian and Bill. Brian, without "closely," how do you think

the markets will react to that?

       MR. MADIGAN. That you are not particularly ready to change your stance of policy.
September 16, 2008                                                                      82 of 108



       MR. DUDLEY. I think the expectation going in is, for most people, that you are not

prepared to ease today, but if things got really dark from here you would. So the question is,

How do you convey that with the right word? You need something in between "closely" and--

       MR. WARSH. I think the sentiment we are trying to suggest is watchful waiting. We are

not indifferent, we are not clueless, we are paying attention, but we are not predisposed. Hence,

Governor Kohn's suggestion.

       MR. KOHN. My suggestion was to substitute "carefully" for "closely." I agree that

"monitor closely" had this other connotation, but I think we should be seen as paying more

attention than usual. There might be another alternative.

       MR. DUDLEY. "The Committee will carefully evaluate economic and financial market

developments." That means you are on the case.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, it is not an analytical thing we are doing. We are just

watching closely.

       MR. WARSH. Keenly? Carefully?

       MR. LACKER. Mr. Chairman?

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes. President Lacker.

       MR. LACKER. Including "closely," what does that imply about the opposite? I mean,

are we going to be able to take that out?

       MR. WARSH. Well, we have done things like "in a timely manner" and other kinds of

phraseology.

       MR. LACKER. Yes, but this is an adjective.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No, it's an adverb.
September 16, 2008                                                                         83 of 108



          MR. LACKER. There goes my credibility. [Laughter] If we take it out, can we use the

phrase without it?

          CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. What we have done in the past is basically just use a new

phrase.

          MR. LACKER. So that means we have to throw this phrase out.

          MR. WARSH. Mr. Chairman, I would support "carefully."

          CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Is that better? President Evans.

          MR. EVANS. Just to be clear, we have gone a long way just now from its being a

semantic discussion to whether or not the Committee wants to hint at the possibility of a near-

term action. I do not have a problem with that. In fact, in my comments I suggested that the

resolution of uncertainty might improve in the next couple of weeks, but that seems to be the

principal issue here, which I don't really recall us discussing in as much detail as we just have.

          CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. No, you're right. But there is another issue, which I think is

the thing we're concerned about and which motivates the change in alternative B, paragraph 2.

We don't want the world to feel that we are not awake, that we are not paying attention. We

know that very unusual things are going on in the financial markets; and we are prepared, maybe

not through monetary policy but through whatever mechanism is necessary, to address that.

          MR. EVANS. Right. So I fully support that sentiment, and if you find the right wording

that captures it, that's fine with me.

          CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other comments? President Plosser.

          MR. PLOSSER. As long as we are throwing monkey wrenches into the language, I think

we do signal our concern. In paragraph 2, we put the very first sentence, which says, "Strains in

financial markets have increased significantly." So we have acknowledged that at the very top of
September 16, 2008                                                                        84 of 108



this statement. So there is no going back on that. I am a little concerned about what moving

back "closely" means. Another alternative that I'll throw out would be, rather than use

"closely," to say that "the Committee will continue to monitor economic and financial

developments."

       SEVERAL. That's what it said last time.

       MR. PLOSSER. Well, that seems fine. We are monitoring these things. Is this the

FOMC statement dictionary we are going to? Is this the code book? [Laughter]

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other comments? All right. Let me just ask for a straw

vote: "closely," no "closely," or "carefully." Do we want "carefully"? All right. Is "carefully"

more acceptable to those who are concerned?

       MR.KOHN. It's less of a code word. The intention was to loosen it up a bit but not

revert to those code words that nearly promise intermeeting action.

       MR. PLOSSER. We make note of this in the lexicon of FOMC terminology.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The semiotics class will begin as soon as the--[Laughter]

All right. "Carefully"--is that okay? I'm seeing nodding. All right? Governor Warsh?

       MR. WARSH. Yes, sir.

       MR. KOHN. I'm closing the dictionary.

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. So we are changing the last part of that sentence.

We are striking the word "market" and changing "closely" to "carefully." Any other comments

or thoughts on the substance, sizzle, or marketing? Or as Rick would say, "moychandising"--

but he's not here. [Laughter] All right. If not, Ms. Danker.

       MS. DANKER. I will be reading the directive from the Bluebook and the statement that

was just circulated. "The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
September 16, 2008                                                                        85 of 108



conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its

long-run objectives, the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets

consistent with maintaining the federal funds rate at an average of around 2 percent."

       Then the statement is as it was handed out, except the last sentence reads, "The

Committee will monitor economic and financial developments carefully and will act as needed to

promote sustainable economic growth and price stability."

               Chairman Bernanke                       Yes
               First Vice President Cumming            Yes
               Governor Duke                           Yes
               President Fisher                        Yes
               Governor Kohn                           Yes
               Governor Kroszner                       Yes
               President Pianalto                      Yes
               President Plosser                       Yes
               President Stern                         Yes
               Governor Warsh                          Yes

       CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. The next meeting is October 28 and 29. Lunch

will be available in the anteroom. While we have lunch, Laricke Blanchard will provide us with

an update on congressional developments. Thank you all very much. The meeting is adjourned.

                                       END OF MEETING
